<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div><span class="xlarge">PART ONE</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c002" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">I<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE CRY</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">To tell the story of a child as you would tell the story of
a grown-up would be to commit forgery, for once you
are wide awake it costs you a great effort to describe
a dream exactly as it occurred.</p>

<p>The tide of events flows remote from the child. Only
occasionally do its eddies touch upon the consciousness of
the child, and then the latter is unaware of their significance.
It is precisely this inability to understand the connection between
events which makes the realities of children so dream-like.</p>

<p>In the long dream of childhood there reigns a capricious,
mysterious and yet irresistible Fate, beneficent like the fairy
with its wand beside the princess’s cradle, or cruel like the
wolf in Red Riding Hood. The shadow of that Fate still
casts itself over our riper years. It haunts us, ghostlike,
even when we have begun consciously to order our lives.
Only a few chosen spirits are able to cast off the spell of
these fairies and trolls.</p>

<p>This is a tale of people whose childhood was passed in
the shadow of the wolf—and who never could escape from
their childhood.</p>

<p>First let me tell you about that evening, many years ago,
when Peter and Hedvig heard a strange cry coming from the
window of their parents’ bedroom. The whole of that day
it had been evident that something was in the air. The
children were not allowed to go into the bedroom at all, nor
even to play on the stairs. After lunch there arrived an old
lady with a bag. And then an old man in spectacles drove
up in a small carriage. It was the doctor. Little Laura
ran away immediately and hid herself, so that she should
not have to show her tongue. But this time the doctor
had not come to see her, for he went straight up to Mother,
and beds were prepared for the children in the green room
downstairs.</p>

<p>Stellan, Laura, and Tord had to go to bed at once, as they
were so young. But Peter and Hedvig went out onto the
kitchen steps. There old Kristin sat and told stories of
former days at Selambshof when “Old Hök” was alive.</p>

<p>The most remarkable thing about Kristin was that she
alone survived from the days of the old owner. She was
grey, bent, tough, the incarnation of the everlasting ill-humoured
peasant soul. Even if she only talked of a pair
of grey stockings it still sounded like a fairy tale. And
since, moreover, the fatalism of age is closely related to
the helplessness of childhood, we can well understand that
she had two attentive listeners in Peter and Hedvig. Just
now the great and serious event that was about to occur
plunged her into a gloomy, solemn mood. And just as
her ancestors for hundreds of grey generations before her
had huddled together by the hearth on dark stormy nights
and had told tales of dangers past, so also she now sat
in the autumn twilight on the kitchen stairs at Selambshof
and told ghost stories to the maids and the cowherd about
the old master. She still looked frightened as she talked
of him. It really sounded as if she were talking of some
great and notorious criminal.</p>

<p>Hedvig had slipped out as silently as a mouse. Her
small face with its dark, hungry eyes was pale. Peter
leaned sulkily in an awkward posture against the doorpost.
But it is not to be supposed that the presence of the children
disturbed Kristin in the very least. She just went on. She
was talking now about the old pensioned couple down by
the Hökar meadow:—You see the master, Old Hök, had
made up his mind to starve out such encumbrances on the
estate. They received only some thin whey and a little
dust that the miller swept up from the floor. But it is
strange how little an old woman can live on. So the old
master had to turn to vermin. He put a sofa that was
crawling into old Kerstin’s cottage. But Kerstin thought,
“If I must die, I shall at least die on his front step”—so
one winter morning she trailed herself up to his house and
began to take off her rags before the front door. And
you may imagine she was not beautiful, because she had
smeared tar over her whole body as a protection against
lice. It was so awful that even Old Hök had to hurry to
his cupboard and take a drop of something strong.</p>

<p>Here Kristin stopped suddenly and caught hold of
Hedvig’s hand as it lay anxiously clenched in her lap. Yes,
indeed, it clenched a sticky lump of sugar. The temptation
had proven too strong as she stole through the empty
kitchen. Kristin’s tone now became still more sinister and
solemn: “Well, well, that’s what heredity does,” she mumbled.
“Keep your fingers out of the sugar jar, Hedvig,
otherwise the sugar knife will fall and cut off your hand.
Or maybe the Bogey Man will come and take you.”</p>

<p>Hedvig turned quite white. A spasm passed over her
face—but she did not cry. She cowered and went on
listening to Kristin, who continued in her sombre manner:
“Yes, as I always say, everything goes wrong here at
Selambshof, both with human beings and with animals,
since the old master drove away the good house spirits.
And there are strange things both in the forest and in the
lake. Would any of you like to be alone at night time in
Enoch’s cave? And don’t bubbles rise even today by the
big stone beyond the reeds? The master said that Matts
fell in whilst he was trying to catch hold of an oar that he
had lost. But I know what I know. They didn’t find
Matts. But afterwards Old Hök always dropped his hooks
just at that spot and caught lots of eels, and beat the young
master because he wouldn’t eat them. Yes, he was like
that. And he has not gone from this place yet. Tell me,
Andres, don’t the horses still jib down there by the grey
stone at the corner of the avenue? They have done so
ever since Old Hök died there. He sat quite straight with
his hands on the knob of his stick and frowned, though he
was stone dead. They had to bring four men to straighten
him out and lay him in his coffin, so obstinate was he even
after death. But he left lots of money.”</p>

<p>At this point, old Kristin lowered her voice and became
humble in spite of herself. That was of course the
people’s admiration for wealth. It was the unconditional
surrender of the old peasant woman to the fact of possession.
And both Andres and the maid, who had been
peacefully dozing during this recital of well-known horrors,
now leant forward with listening eyes as Kristin sat
there and spun out her story of all the gold in the chest
and all the corn in the barns— “Yes, he did look after the
farm, did the old master. In those days there was something
like a manure heap for a cock to stand on and crow.
And nobody dared to steal even a potato then. Do you
hear that, Andres? No, those were different days—for now
you do nothing but idle about and steal. Well, I suppose
everything will lie waste soon. Yes, yes, we have not seen
the end yet—we have not seen the end. And there are lots
of children to share it too—and more are coming. It is a
real pity. Poor Peter, who is the eldest and will inherit it.
Poor Peter, that’s what I say! Are you loafing about there
with your hands in your pockets again? Take your hands
out of your pockets—otherwise you will lose both house
and land. You wait and see if I don’t speak the truth.
And don’t climb on the rail and wear out your stockings.”</p>

<p>Kristin had come to this point when they heard a scream
from the bedroom upstairs. The silence beneath the bare
elms was suddenly and harshly torn asunder. Perhaps it
sounded to Peter and Hedvig like one of those strange,
petrified screeches which sometimes fill the sleep of grown-ups
with horror.</p>

<p>The little group dissolved instantly. The maid ran into
the kitchen for the kettles. Anders strolled hesitatingly towards
the lake, and Kristin pushed the children into the
dining-room and turned the key. Peter and Hedvig were
locked in with Old Hök, whose portrait hung there in the
twilight over the leather-covered sofa. They were standing
in the middle of the room and dared not look at the
picture. They were expecting another scream that would
make their hair stand on end again. They supposed it
must come since they had been driven in here. But they
heard no scream—for many long, long minutes all was
still. By and by their eyes were irresistibly drawn to Old
Hök. There he stood in a long, black coat. And his nose
looked like a bird’s beak, and his fingers were clenched
round his stick handle and looked like claws. But worst of
all were his eyes, for wherever you stood they stared
straight down at you, so that you felt that your blood ran
cold. It had, of course, been horrid to listen to Kristin,
but then, it was not altogether uncanny, for there was mixed
with it a curiously pleasant sensation as when you step into
a pool and the cold water oozes into your stockings. But
this! Oh this was ever so much worse! Their childish
fear, awakened out of its semi-sleep, now fluttered wildly
round Old Hök—and Kristin’s superstition and her prophecies
of woe hovered over them in new and terrifying shapes.</p>

<p>Peter was perhaps not so sensitive to the more remote
horrors. His fears fastened on what was nearest to hand.
Very small as he was, he stood there staring at the grey and
tattered ghost of poverty. His anxiety was centred on a
big signet ring that Old Hök was wearing on his finger.
He wore it, of course, because he was awfully rich. But
where was the ring now? Old Hök’s eyes pursued him
with the question: Where is my ring now? Peter knew
nothing of it. His father had not worn it, and it was not in
his mother’s jewel box. Supposing Anders had stolen it!
Or fat Lotten in the kitchen? Fancy if they should steal
everything at Selambshof, so that he, Peter, had to sit
without any clothes in the forest and starve and shiver.
Fancy if that was why Mamma lay up there and screamed
so terribly. Yes, he knew it was Mamma who had
screamed.</p>

<p>That was Peter’s fear. But Hedvig’s fear was different,
deeper, vaguer. She was afraid of the Bogey Man
with whom Kristin used to frighten her. And now he had
suddenly assumed Old Hök’s features. Yes the Bogey
Man was there in the room, just in front of her. But it
never occurred to her to take Peter’s hand. Hedvig was not
like that. She was alone from the beginning, alone in her
fear and helpless with that complete and profound helplessness
that grown-ups only experience in the dangers and
horrors of a nightmare.</p>

<p>And now they heard another scream, fainter but just as
dreadful. It came from all sides at once—from the stairs,
from the door, from the walls themselves. Hedvig suddenly
understood, the Bogey Man had come! He was taking
somebody as he passed on his way. Because it was,
of course, herself, Hedvig, that he really wanted. She
shrank and closed her eyes. Then she looked up again,
just for a second. He was no longer there above the sofa.
He had climbed down—he was coming towards her! He
was stretching out his claws!!</p>

<p>Hedvig dug her nails into the edge of the table and
screamed, screamed wildly. She could not bear it. Peter
also started screaming. He saw himself standing starving
and naked in a big dark forest full of wolves. It is
not to be wondered at then that they screamed. But that
was not all. The younger children, who slept in the adjoining
room, awoke in a fright and started to scream too.
So the whole chorus of children’s voices joined with the
mother’s groans above.</p>

<p>Kristin suddenly appeared in the door with a candle:
“Good gracious—you dreadful children to make such a
noise when the mistress is ill!”</p>

<p>She packed Peter and Hedvig into the green room. Oh,
what a wonderful, pleasant relief it was to feel Kristin’s
bony hands in your back. They undressed with feverish
haste, afraid lest she should go before they had had time to
pull the bedclothes over their heads.</p>

<p>“Dearest Kristin, please leave the light burning.”—“Nonsense,
go to sleep now.”</p>

<p>And the light was gone.</p>

<p>They lay huddled up in terrible darkness like two poor
little orphans. Fear kept them long awake and pursued
them ever in their dreams, when at last they had fallen
asleep. The night of the earth is but a passing shadow,
but the night of fear in the heart is evil and long. And
for many it seems as if there will be no morning.</p>

<p>The following day the children at Selambshof lost their
mother. Both she and the newborn baby died before their
father reached home. He had been kept late during a
shoot at Kolsnäs.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">II<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE ROBBER’S STRONGHOLD</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">The children were playing up in the big attic at
Selambshof. The rain pattered against the tiles of
the roof and rushed down the spouts. But inside it
was dry and dusty and mysterious in the twilight among
the roof-timbers and the chimney pipes. And there were
heaps of things that the grown-ups had thrown aside, but
which for that very reason were so tempting: old, worn-out
things which had reached their second childhood, and just
for that reason suited the children’s games so well.</p>

<p>It was only with great difficulty that Stellan could open
the lock of the iron-bound oak chest. Triumphant, he
pulled out a torn black skirt and spread it over the pram in
which Hedvig lay on her back, pale and with her legs hanging
over the edge. He called to Peter, who was the hearse-horse,
and the melancholy procession was just about to
start, when Hedvig began to sneeze because the skirt was
full of red pepper.</p>

<p>“Can’t you pretend to be dead, you silly girl,” shouted
Stellan impatiently.</p>

<p>And Laura bent down and giggled in the midst of the
procession. Besides these two, the mourners were Herman
Hermansson from Ekbacken and little Tord. But Tord
did not want to take part in the game any longer, so he crept
into a corner and sulked. The outlook was not very
promising.</p>

<p>Creakily the pram began to move. They were playing
“Mamma’s funeral” for the hundredth time.</p>

<p>The procession stopped before the church, which was the
triangle under the staircase up to the ceiling. Herman,
with an air of deadly earnest on his open face, stood and
chimed a nail on a stove ring. But Stellan drew the black
skirt over his shoulders and climbed up on a wooden box
and pretended to be the clergyman. He threw his head
back and laying his hands on his chest began to hold forth:
“From the earth you come, and wipe your feet, and honour
your father and mother and sister and brother, and don’t
hang on to people’s skirts, and don’t balance yourself on
your chair because you will fall, fallevall, appala, mesala,
mesinka, meso, sebedi, sebede, and get away now you silly,
for now you are dead.”</p>

<p>This long rigmarole was uttered with the utmost solemnity
and did not fail to impress the listeners. Hedvig grew
frightened of shamming death. She was so frightened that
she felt cold shivers down her back. But she did not climb
out of the coffin, she remained as quiet as a mouse, for she
knew that if she gave up the place of honour Laura would
seize it at once. And Hedvig did not want that on any
account.</p>

<p>Suddenly the rain stopped pattering on the roof.
Silently the shadows crept on in the dust under the heavy
beams. It was as if the silence and the emptiness of the
big gloomy house had stealthily crept up among these
mourners. They really felt the emptiness after their
mother’s death, after her dainties and her scolding—perhaps
most after her scolding. Yes, formerly when Mamma
was in the kitchen scolding, they heard it up in the attic.
But with old Kristin it was different. She kept on worrying
them the whole time—and they got tired of it—</p>

<p>And then there was something funny about father.
Since Mamma died he was always in town, and when sometimes
he came home he looked so dull-eyed and shabby, almost
as if he was drunk. And then they felt still lonelier.
Stellan had overheard Kristin say to the gardener that the
master was drinking himself to death—but Stellan could
not understand how that could happen. Surely one did
not die from being drunk?</p>

<p>Alas, how gloomy and empty it was up there in the big
attic! Herman began to long for his home at Ekbacken
where it was not at all strange as it was here.</p>

<p>But the Selambshof children felt they must fight against
the silence with shouts and noise and quarrelling.</p>

<p>“Let us play drunkards,” shouted Peter and began to
slouch and reel and push the others about in his clumsy
way.</p>

<p>But Stellan knew better. Both Peter and Herman were
stronger than Stellan, but all the same it was usually he
who was leader. If a lot of dogs play about on a lawn
you will in nine cases out of ten find that there is a small
one taking the lead in the game.</p>

<p>“No, let us get out on the roof and play robbers,” he
shouted.</p>

<p>With the help of Peter and Herman he managed to open
the big trap door and they tumbled out on the roof, which
sloped gently and had strong iron bars between the battlements.
Selambshof was an old manor house which
had been rebuilt, during a period of bad taste, in the
gloomy style of a fortress castle, with narrow windows,
towers, gables and battlements.</p>

<p>They were on forbidden ground. Hedvig stopped half
inside and half outside the trap—she was like that. “Take
care you people on the roof,” she whimpered repeatedly to
the others, but they took no notice of her.</p>

<p>It was awfully cold up there. And it gave you a queer
feeling in the pit of the stomach to be so high over the wet
glistening tops of the trees in the park. And she had never
seen such a big black cloud as the one which was just passing
over the town. Beneath was the black smoke and
through the smoke the windows flashed like a shot. But
opposite the sky was as green as ice, except in the furthest
distance over the dark and ragged edge of the forest, where
it was yellow. And the lake looked like a piece of mirror
of the sky which had fallen down among the trees. It was
quite unbroken except between Kolsnäs and Stonehill,
where the steamer was passing and shattered it.</p>

<p>Stellan was the first to reach the railing. Oh, how cold
he felt about the forehead. But giddiness changed to recklessness—wild
shouting recklessness. How small everything
down there looked! Just look at Anders at the corner
of the stable! Wasn’t he a mere spot. And Kristin—what
did he care about Kristin? No, now they would have
some fun!</p>

<p>“Selambshof is a robbers’ stronghold!” he shouted—quite
pale with excitement. “We are wild highwaymen!
We care for nothing—we just kill and take what
we want.”</p>

<p>This seemed to appeal to Peter. He took aim at Ekbacken
and pulled the trigger—that is to say he levelled
his finger and said: “Bang, I shot Ekbacken! Ekbacken
is mine.”</p>

<p>Herman protested: “No—Ekbacken belongs to my
father.”</p>

<p>He was severely snubbed: “Blockhead! are we robbers
or are we not?”</p>

<p>And then Stellan mercilessly shot to pieces Kolsnäs, the
white walls of which peeped out behind the trees on the
other side of the lake. Peter reloaded and took aim and
shot at Trefvinge, which was the finest place within sight,
a real big castle with four copper towers far away beyond
the edge of the forest. Things were now getting exciting, for
Peter and Stellan and Herman were all aiming at the town
itself with all its church towers and chimneys! <i>Bang, Bang,
Bang</i>, the shots were fired almost simultaneously.</p>

<p>“The town is mine” cried Herman. “I shot first.”</p>

<p>“No, I shot first,” lied Peter confidently.</p>

<p>“No, mine was the only one that hit,” cried Stellan
stamping on the roof. “Now both Kolsnäs and the town
are mine.”</p>

<p>“That’s not fair,” insisted Herman, “I ought to have
something, and I shot first.”</p>

<p>“That’s a lie,” insisted Peter quietly, but menacingly.</p>

<p>Stellan was already furious: “Whose idea was it that
we should play robbers—eh? I am the chief of the robbers.
And now I have taken the town and am king of
the castle.”</p>

<p>But Herman would not give way, as he knew that his was
the first shot.</p>

<p>“It’s not fair. It’s beastly unfair. I won’t play robbers
with you if you are unfair.”</p>

<p>It looked like a fight.</p>

<p>Laura had been watching with her teeth chattering and
trying to hide her little fat fingers in the sleeves of her
frock. Now she jumped excitedly down towards the infuriated
robbers. Unobserved, even Hedvig left her spy
hole in the trap.</p>

<p>Stellan and Herman had already come to grips and
scratched and tore at each other in the artless way of children.
At last they began to wrestle and Stellan, who was
the shorter of the two, was underneath.</p>

<p>“You see that I did shoot first,” panted Herman.</p>

<p>Then Peter with his cool cheek intervened. He rolled
round this human knot and extricated Stellan, who, rather
shamefaced at his defeat, withdrew with feigned contempt
from the robber band. Then Peter sat down astride of
Herman.</p>

<p>“Now say that the town is mine.”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>He began to jump on Herman. This hurt Herman, because
he was lying athwart the ridge of the roof.</p>

<p>“Say that it is mine!”</p>

<p>“No.”</p>

<p>Peter jumped on him more than ever.</p>

<p>“Is it mine, what?”</p>

<p>Herman did not cry out. But he hit out wildly, and at
last, maddened by pain, he bit Peter’s hand. Peter at once
uttered a wild scream. Then Herman let go. But Peter
was wise and screamed after the pain was gone.</p>

<p>“Take care, you who bite,” piped Hedvig in her thin
voice.</p>

<p>Herman suddenly became horrified at his wicked deed.
“Dear Peter, please forgive me,” he begged.</p>

<p>“Was it I who took the town then?” hissed Peter.</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose it was.”</p>

<p>Peter felt better at once, but it suddenly struck him that
his victory was not worth much and so he began to moan
and cry again: “Oh, Oh, Oh.”</p>

<p>Herman was again alarmed and stricken with remorse:
“Dear Peter, don’t cry, please forgive me, Peter, dear.”</p>

<p>“Will you give me your glass marble then?” whimpered
Peter pitifully.</p>

<p>Herman pulled the glass marble out of his bag with a
sigh and gave it to Peter. So at last Peter had gained
something real from his robber’s career. He stood smiling
to himself and weighed the five heavy marbles in his right
hand but did not trouble to wipe off the blood from his
left hand. It might always be useful to leave it there.</p>

<p>During this scene little Tord had also clambered out
on to the roof. But he took no notice of the cries and noise
of the others. He sat apart and leant over an old green
box where nasturtiums had once grown, but which was now
half-filled with rain water. Something moved in the
depths. Strange little creatures with only heads and tails
teemed in it. And they rose to the surface with little
jerks and then disappeared again in the black, brown
depths. Oh! how wonderfully mysterious it all was! He
drew himself up silently. He cast anxious side-glances at
the fight which was going on. Soon they would probably
come and kick over the whole of his wonderful find. He
hated his big brothers and sisters, who never let him enjoy
anything in peace.</p>

<p>A voice was heard from the stairs and he crept behind
the chimney.</p>

<p>It was Kristin. She emerged from the trap door like
an old witch ready for a ride on her broom. She shook
her fist, which was covered with gouty lumps, but nevertheless
still had an iron grip.</p>

<p>“Were there ever such heathen children. You will
break your necks and be good for nothing—that’s what will
happen to you. Come down at once from the roof.”</p>

<p>The children slouched back to the trap door. Each one
of them felt Kristin’s fingers in his hair. Peter approached
cautiously and hunched up, holding his wounded hand like
a shield in front of him. Kristin caught sight of it.</p>

<p>“What have you been doing, you naughty boy?”</p>

<p>Peter did not tell any tales himself but he looked beseechingly
at Hedvig. He knew that she could not resist.</p>

<p>“It was Herman,” she panted. “He bit Peter until the
blood ran. I only went out on the roof to see who was
crying.”</p>

<p>In this way both Peter and Hedvig escaped a hair pulling
and that was exactly what they had hoped for.</p>

<p>But Herman got a double dose and went home with
bitterness in his heart.</p>

<p>Not until the other children were in their beds was Tord
missed. It was not at all unusual for him to be lost like
that. They looked for him in the usual places: the empty
dog kennel, the wood shed, the hollow oak by the stable.
But without success. At last Hedvig remembered that he
had been with them on the roof and there they found him
huddled up on the cold tiles, leaning against the box with
the wonderful mosquito larvæ, and wet with dew. He was
sleeping with his dirty little thumb in his mouth.</p>

<p>Soon everything was silent in the big house. And one
of the frosty “iron” nights of June fell with its devastation
upon the neglected garden and fields of Selambshof.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">III<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE DANCE OF THE CROW INDIANS</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">It was a fine warm summer afternoon, when the mosquito
swarms hovered like high pillars of smoke in the
avenue of Selambshof.</p>

<p>But in the garden on the north side of the house Oskar
Selamb was sitting in his usual seat. He was sitting just
where the mosses of the walls hung most heavily over the
grey stone base and where the damp shade beneath the old
elm tree seemed full of evil memories. His big straw hat
was pushed far back on his head and his purple trembling
hands were clasped round the handle of his walking stick.
His beard grew like a weed round his weak half open
mouth, and he stared in front of him with a lifeless,
taciturn gloom that had little human left in it.</p>

<p>A friend of former days would scarcely have recognized
him.</p>

<p>How had Oskar Selamb, owner of Selambshof, father of
five young children, and not much past fifty, come to such
a pass? The immediate cause was probably the death of
his wife, but in order really to understand this tragedy
one must go back to the tyranny of old Enoch. It was he
who had broken his son’s spirit. Up to his thirtieth year
Oskar had been little more than a sort of superior farm
labourer on the estate, without any rights, without a will
of his own, reviled and ill-treated by Old Hök, who kept his
claws and his beak sharp till the end. It leaves a mark on
a man to have his hopes in life picked piece by piece out
of his breast by a father who feeds his own strong flame of
life by doing so. When the hour of delivery once struck
at last, Oskar Selamb had come to hate his inheritance.
Yes, he hated this place of humiliation, for ever haunted by
the old man’s shadow. But he had not strength to throw it
all off and begin afresh. He merely absented himself as
much as possible and let the estate go to ruin. And late in
life he married a servant girl, whom he had raised to the
rank of housekeeper at Selambshof. His friends were not
surprised by this mesalliance. Even during the days of his
humiliation he had been fond of the girl, for which reason
of course she had at once been shown the door. And when
Oskar afterwards by chance caught sight of her behind a
bar, he took her into his house and married her, out
of pure spite, as people said, in order to make old
Enoch turn in his grave. To tell the truth, he was not
in love with her. It was rather the spasmodic effort of
a weak and vacillating man to kick away the past. His wife
was a small, dark, thin woman with a pointed nose, and
moderately capable and energetic within her domain. Her
voice penetrated shrill and alert through the fumes of the
kitchen or the washtub. She remained a bad-tempered but
capable servant of her husband and, later, of the children.
But for her the home would not have held together as well
as it did, for Oskar Selamb became more and more incapable
of looking after anything. And he still spent
most of his time in the town. There he sat among
his fellow topers, lost at whist and in business, cursed
and harangued, as weak people do, between his draughts
of steaming toddy, on the evils of the times. Meanwhile
Selambshof decayed, Ryssvik was lost, the forest melted
away and the mortgages became heavier and heavier.
His wife bore him in quick succession and with eternal
lamentations, five hungry and crying children. With the
sixth she succumbed herself. When her husband came
driving home that autumn morning she already lay dead in
the big double bed.</p>

<p>Oskar Selamb had never loved his wife. He had neglected
her, treated her brutally, and worn her out. But all
the same her death gave him the finishing blow. It was her
scolding that had kept him going. Now he sank irrevocably.
His journeys to town grew more frequent then ever.
Meaner and meaner grew the bars outside which his shabby
old coach had to wait till late into the night. He could not
even keep himself decent. Old friends avoided him, whilst
discussing with interest whether it was from joy of getting
rid of his wife or from grief at losing her that he was drinking
himself to death.</p>

<p>The more subtle held that it was a combination of these
two feelings. The only one who tried to do something for
his friend Oskar was his neighbour and companion from
childhood, William Hermansson, owner of the Ekbacken
sawmill and shipyard. As it happened the Ekbacken establishment
was situated just by the main road into town,
and when, nowadays, William saw Oskar’s dreary looking
coach, he stepped out on to his front-door step and admonished
his old friend in carefully chosen words. He tried
in every way to tempt him to decent intercourse in his respectable
and comfortable widower’s home, reminding him
of the times when he had found a refuge there from old
Enoch’s tyranny. But Oskar always drove past with some
vague pretext of important meetings and urgent business.</p>

<p>Within a few months the crash came. Oskar Selamb was
brought home a pitiful wreck after having had a stroke at
a miserable little inn in the slums. After several months
he got up from his sickbed, bloated, with unsteady hands,
and no memory, scarcely a human being any more. But
still there was no sign that death would mercifully do
its work. After solemn lamentations, the owner of Ekbacken
agreed to become the guardian of the children, and
through his efforts a new bailiff, named John Brundin, was
appointed.</p>

<p>That is how things had been for more than two years at
Selambshof. Thus on the still summer evening we have
described Oskar Selamb sat on his usual seat underneath
the old elm. He sat there so motionless that the sparrows
hopped about in front of him on the round stone slab
superposed on an enormous oak stump which did service
as a table. But out there in the slanting golden rays of
the sun, round the wing where the bailiff lived, shimmered
clouds of gnats and fine spiders’ webs.</p>

<p>Stellan and Laura were playing in the sand and in the
lilac hedge in front of the house. The simple games of
robbers of former days were now a thing of the past. They
wore a bright array of feathers, and carried bows and
tomahawks. They had read Cooper and Marryat and
knew how to choose impressive names and make subtle
stratagems. The hedge was also dense and deep, with fine
ambushes and splendid hiding places for stealthy Indian
warfare. Stellan was called “Black Panther” and Laura
“Flying Arrow.” Don’t imagine that she was allowed to
impersonate some pale squaw with a soft flower name.
No, she was a young warrior on her first warpath. “Black
Panther’s” voice sounded sharp and commanding when he
was teaching his young companions the use of the bow.
“Flying Arrow” had displayed some squeamishness and
had giggled in an unwarriorlike manner, which was not in
keeping with the seriousness of the moment, and which was
duly corrected.</p>

<p>Peter was looking on. Big and clumsy in his outgrown
and patched sailor’s suit, he leant against a rusty rainpipe
grinning provocatively. “Black Panther” ran up to him.</p>

<p>“Won’t you come and play with us and be a Pale-Face?”</p>

<p>“No,” came Peter’s sulky reply in a husky voice, about
to break—</p>

<p>“Black Panther” looked round about him wondering how
to get some new excitement into the game, as it was beginning
to become dull. His glance fell with a sudden expression
of premature and hopeless loathing on his father on the
seat. But just as suddenly he brightened up—caught hold
of “Flying Arrow” by the arm and pointed at the old man:</p>

<p>“He is a Comanche. He is ‘Heavy Ox.’ We’ll creep up
to him from two sides.”</p>

<p>“Black Panther” and “Flying Arrow” crept across the
plot of sand with sly, watchful eyes. Then “Black Panther”
sprang up like a steel spring released and swung his lasso.
“Heavy Ox” was caught. They tied him to the seat as to a
torture post. “Heavy Ox” did not seem to notice anything.
From behind, “Black Panther” even managed to put on his
head a chieftain’s feather crown consisting of some crow’s
feathers pushed into the ribbon of an old, brimless, tattered
straw hat. But “Heavy Ox” sat there with his new and
wonderful ornament as solemnly and as apathetically
unconcerned as ever.</p>

<p>Shrill laughter from “Flying Arrow” greeted this ridiculous
apparition.</p>

<p>They began to dance round their victim. Swinging their
tomahawks and their bows, they danced to the accompaniment
of wild cries of excitement.</p>

<p>“‘Heavy Ox’ can’t get free! ‘Heavy Ox’ is fat and
stupid! ‘Heavy Ox’ shall die. ‘Heavy Ox’ is fat and
stupid!”</p>

<p>This sudden wild joy quite surprised the Crow Indians
themselves. They perhaps did not know that there was
vengeance in this game. And how much had they not to
avenge! How well they might have called out to “Heavy
Ox”: “That is for the hundreds of meals that were made
disgusting by your nasty snuffling! That’s for your horrid
snuffle and for your dull eyes that don’t see us! That’s for
the neglect, the ruin, the incurable wounds to our tender
beings! That’s for the great musty hole in which we spend
our childhood.”</p>

<p>Tired of dancing they sat down to smoke a calumet,
whilst still deriding and challenging their bound enemy.</p>

<p>“Heavy Ox” had taken no more notice of his tormentors
than of the flies that buzzed around him. But now he
showed signs of restlessness. And his restlessness was always
of the same kind:</p>

<p>“Is it time for supper soon?” he stammered.</p>

<p>Then they jumped up again and began to dance with a
renewal of their wild exultation:</p>

<p>“‘Heavy Ox’ shan’t get any food. ‘Heavy Ox’ is fat and
stupid. ‘Heavy Ox’ shall die! ‘Heavy Ox’ is fat and
stupid!”</p>

<p>Peter was still leaning against the rainpipe. He followed
the game with a half troubled, half pleased, grin.
“They will catch it for this,” he thought. “I have not
taken part in it. I have been standing here the whole time
by the rainpipe and have not taken any part in it.”</p>

<p>Then Peter saw Mr. Brundin thrust his head out of a
window. It was beginning to get exciting. The punishment
for these reckless children was drawing nearer. But
Peter was at once disillusioned. Brundin only laughed
and puffed at a big cigar. And Peter made a note in his
memory that Brundin only grinned at forbidden and dangerous
things.</p>

<p>Then at last something happened. Old Hermansson
came walking up the avenue. And instantly Brundin’s
head disappeared from the window. But “Black Panther”
and “Flying Arrow” noticed nothing. Old Hermansson
walked quietly across the sand plot. He was as straight-backed
as if he had been drawn on a slate by a good boy.
He walked with his coat buttoned high up to the throat,
his head erect, and his hands behind his back. He walked
with measured dignity and each step seemed to be an admonition
to the careless, the irreverent and the reckless.
One can scarcely imagine anything more typical to children
of the grown-up.</p>

<p>Peter stood still with excitement and bit his nails. This
was really a great moment.</p>

<p>Then Mr. Brundin came rushing out of the door. He had
put aside the big cigar and hastened with every mark of
respect to free “Heavy Ox” from his bonds, whilst with
serious and angry mien he shook his fist at the two Indians.</p>

<p>This was something more for Peter to note: a moment
ago Brundin had only grinned and now he became serious
when old Hermansson was present.</p>

<p>At last old Hermansson had arrived. Now at last somebody
would be cuffed. But Peter had to wait. Old Hermansson
first saw that the unsuitable ornament was removed
from his old friend’s head. Then he greeted him,
obstinately maintaining the habit of speech of past and
happier days.</p>

<p>“How do you do, how do you do, my dear Oskar? I
hope you are well. Yes, it is a fine day today, a very fine
day. So I thought I would take a little walk in order to
talk to our good bailiff about the rye-crop.”</p>

<p>Oskar Selamb had recovered his greasy old hat again.
But he was clearly completely insensible to these see-saws
of exultation and degradation. He stared sulkily in front
of him and grunted:</p>

<p>“I want my supper—can’t I have my supper?”</p>

<p>“In due time, my dear Oskar. In due time you will
certainly have your supper.”</p>

<p>Now it seemed to be Stellan’s and Laura’s turn. Their
guardian placed himself in front of them and made a
little speech:</p>

<p>“Listen carefully now, my children,” he said. “I don’t
want to see you show your father such disrespect again.
Honour thy father and mother that thy days may be long
in the land and that it may go well with you.”</p>

<p>Here he shook his head solemnly and let the culprits go.
And the fair and plump little Laura danced away with
small side steps like a puppy, but not before she had cast
a coquettish and triumphant glance at Peter in passing,
as if to say,—“Cheated!—there was no thrashing!”</p>

<p>But Stellan stood there with all his war-like array in his
hand and with an air of disillusionment looked at “Heavy
Ox,” who was no longer “Heavy Ox,” but only the familiar
dismal figure. Then he lightly shrugged his shoulders
and quietly went away whistling among the currant bushes.
With his quick cold eyes and his proud mouth he did not
exactly look like one of those who fare badly in this world.</p>

<p>It may be that old Hermansson was also somewhat mistaken.
It may be that callousness developed early in life
may be one of the conditions of success in this world. It
may be that daily and hourly contact with degraded humanity
simply hardens a little Indian’s heart for life’s cruel
warfare.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">IV<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">PETER THE WATCH-DOG</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Peter’s school report at the end of the term was, as
usual, not good, and he was not promoted. Now he
sat in the billiard room on the third floor grinding
away in the summer holidays.</p>

<p>Peter sat drawing his fingers through his rough hair and
bent over his book. We all know that struggle against
an incurable lack of concentration, the bending very closely
over an unfortunate text until the letters begin to swell
and jostle each other out of line and shamelessly vanish
in the blue.</p>

<p>Peter lifted his head, puffing as if he had been under
water and could no longer hold his breath. But it was
not only the common, boyish instinct to throw all to the
winds and rush out to the day’s adventures in the forest
and field. It was not only the healthy restlessness of a
growing boy that was reflected in his face. He turned and
twisted on his chair and looked about him, and secretly
cast stealthy side-glances from beneath his unkempt shock
of hair as if fearing that somebody stood behind him listening
to his thoughts.</p>

<p>Not even when he was alone could he look anything
straight in the face.</p>

<p>Now he jumped up and took a turn round the old billiard
table covered by an old torn dust sheet. All round
him in the dilapidated room the torn wallpaper was curling
and the dry paint was peeling off the skirting boards
and window frames. Peter stopped a moment in front of a
blackboard that had once been the billiard marker, but
which was now covered with his unsolved algebra problems.
He made a weak effort, but then he flung away the chalk
as if it had burnt his fingers, and rushed suddenly to the
window and peeped out.</p>

<p>Since Old Hök’s time the billiard room had been generally
called the conservatory. Its high, narrow fortress-like
windows faced three ways, and from this high point one
could look out over the whole of the Selamb estate. On a
stand made of three worn-out cues stood a long, battered
leather-covered telescope. It was here that Peter’s grandfather
used to sit and spy on his people in order mercilessly
to sweep down on the idle or the dishonest. You could
still see his old focus marks on the brass tube of the telescope,
and they had crept further and further out as he
grew older and more short sighted.</p>

<p>If anybody had seen Peter by the window overlooking the
terrace he would have thought that Old Hök was not yet
quite dead.</p>

<p>The bailiff was going to have a crayfish party for some
friends from the town. He was standing down there hanging
up Chinese lanterns. Frida, the new maid, was handing
them to him out of a big clothes basket.</p>

<p>Peter found it impossible to remain any longer at his
work. Silently as a mouse he stole out into the garden.
He did not make straight for the terrace, but walked with
long, searching side-glances till at last he settled on an
observation post in the dense lilac hedge. Then he pretended
to be carving a stick, but all the time he kept his
eyes on the little lantern-scene. Brundin was standing
in his shirt sleeves with a long cigar stuck in the corner
of his mouth so as not to get the smoke in his eyes. He was
a fair man with small, light, curly mustaches. He was
wearing a check waistcoat, riding breeches and top boots.
But even if he did not look like the Fairy Prince himself,
he might at least have passed for one of the members of
his suite. For the moment he was carrying on with Frida,
who made eyes and giggled as if he had tickled her.</p>

<p>Peter sat and fidgetted. There was a lot of questions
that tormented him like insects. That Brundin
fellow had no farm, so how could he be so awfully smart
with his check waistcoat and heavy gold chain stretched
across his vest? And his tie-pin was as big as a penny!
And where had he got all those splendid lanterns. And
why should Frida stand there and dance attendance on him
and hand him the lanterns?</p>

<p>All Peter’s brooding and discontent found expression
in that one question: why should our Frida stand there
and hand lanterns to Brundin? And he had to gulp it down
time after time lest it should escape his lips in a loud
growl.</p>

<p>No, he could not bear to look any longer.</p>

<p>With his eyes on the ground and his big hands hanging
awkwardly by his sides Peter strolled round the yard and
out into the fields. He lumbered about like a watch-dog,
sniffing reflectively at every corner. Everywhere he
scented decay. From his own father, who sat there heedless
and inert on his bench by the front door, and who in
the depth of his decay had no thought for anything else
but his next meal, this ruin spread itself over garden,
barn, stable and granary—and out over fields, meadows
and forest. There were a thousand things that whispered
of it, the weeds in the paths, the broken glass of the
cucumber frames, the broken down, moss-covered fences,
bottomless patches of road, bare neglected forest slopes.
There were a thousand things Peter would have liked to
ask Brundin about, but when he met him smart and resplendent
with a big cigar in the corner of his mouth,
a kind of paralysis of fear overtook him. Not with red-hot
tongs could one have dragged a straightforward, direct
question out of the boy—and that even though the
bailiff had never uttered an unkind word to him, but on
the contrary had cracked good-natured jokes with him and
had offered him good things from town which Peter had
grabbed clumsily and disappeared with, like a dog who is
afraid of a thrashing.</p>

<p>The labourers on the estate were the only ones with
whom Peter could talk on the subject. Obeying the instinct
of a sort of subordinate, the future heir pried about
for signs of discontent, for hints and suggestions. But
he had little success. It was of importance that he
should be very careful. He turned his questions over
and over again in his mind before they passed his lips.
In his timidity and excess of carefulness he began to
beat about the bush so much that often he never reached
his point at all. Those who asked for nothing better
than to speak the truth about the bailiff did not understand
what he was driving at. And cleverer ones and
those with a bad conscience saw through him in their own
way, and thought it best to beware of this sneaking,
spying nuisance of a boy and not to criticise those in
authority.</p>

<p>Down in the bend of the avenue Peter met Anders, who
was driving home with a load of rye from the Hökar
meadow. The boy climbed up in the rye beside the
old stable hand, but he did not think how jolly it was to lie
softly like this among the sheaves glowing with blue cornflowers
and to swing gently along in the half-light under the
old elms. Today his restlessness was worse than ever, and
he grew quite bold of speech.</p>

<p>“How much is a load like this worth, Anders?”</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s worth a good deal of money. And it would
fetch more if it wasn’t for the weeds.”</p>

<p>“Who takes care of the money?”</p>

<p>“The bailiff, of course.”</p>

<p>“But Anders, when they pay him the money, how can he
know what is ours and what is his?”</p>

<p>“Well, Master Peter, the bailiff keeps his books.”</p>

<p>“But supposing somebody went and wrote something
wrong in his books?”</p>

<p>“No, they can’t, for he keeps his books locked up,
you see.”</p>

<p>“But suppose he should forget to write something in the
books?”</p>

<p>Peter’s tone was one of entreaty, but Anders was impossible.</p>

<p>“It is his chief work to write down everything in the
books,” he muttered with a side-glance.</p>

<p>Thus Peter helped to drive in the rye. They had reached
the barn now and he jumped down no wiser than before.
The cracked old gong rang for dinner, and it sounded like
a funeral bell.</p>

<p>The dining-room smelt of “sluring,” a soup which was
the abomination of all the children. They pushed the
chairs about, kicked each other’s legs, and quarrelled because
nobody wanted to sit next to father, who was horrid
at table. They were just like a lot of crows on a branch
at night time, pecking at each other because none wants to
sit furthest out on the branch, in the darkness and emptiness.
Finally Tord was pushed there, he was the smallest
and weakest. Frida flung down the soup. It was worse
than ever. There had probably been no time for cooking
because of the preparations for the evening party. Peter
shrank and held his hands to his ears so as not to hear his
father eating his soup. There came a queer smell from the
neighbourhood of Tord, who did not touch his food but
pulled out a dirty handkerchief full of snakes’ eggs which
he had found in the manure heap. Stellan waited upon his
father. When he had lapped up his soup, the young man
was there in a flash with his own full plate the contents of
which disappeared just as quickly. Laura’s plate went the
same way. Those two always adopted the same strategy.
But Peter and Hedvig did their duty. There were bread
fritters to follow. Old Kristin came in. Nowadays,
there was not much left of her. Usually she sat in her little
room mumbling as she knitted. But she still retained her
power over Tord, so he had to sit there with his soup.
He could be shut up with his plate for ever so long without
uttering a sound. He was a strange, silent child, Tord.</p>

<p>Still hungry and out of humour Peter crept down into
the garden and stole whatever he could find to eat there.</p>

<p>Then the steamer arrived with Brundin’s guests. There
were corn dealers, greengrocers, and butchers from the
town, nothing but rogues that he did business with. They
at once sat down to smoke and drink punch at a long
table on the terrace. From the beginning there were heard
shouts of coarse, bass voices and roars of laughter, and it
was clear that they had laid a solid foundation for their
merriment in some inn in town. Frida, fresh and not at
all shy, in spite of her seventeen years, flitted about the
whole time bearing trays frequently replenished and was
vigorously pinched, tickled and caressed. But in the midst
of all shone Brundin in his check waistcoat, and whenever
you looked at him he sat with glass uplifted and “Your
health” on his lips.</p>

<p>Peter hovered about, gloomy and unnoticed, on the
fringe of this festive party. He loitered about the bedroom
window, he crept into the lilac hedge. In the end
he secured himself up among the branches of the big
maple tree below the signal-guns on the terrace. From
there he saw them light the gay-coloured lanterns and bring
in the enormous dishes of crayfish, with their fennel crowns
to the accompaniment of wild shouts of welcome. The
lanterns swung to and fro and the candles in the big candlesticks
from off the sideboard flickered and flamed as if intoxicated,
and cast a shimmering light on napkins tied
round fat necks, on rolled-up shirt sleeves and rows of
sparkling glasses simultaneously raised.</p>

<p>To crown all Peter saw how Stellan and Laura who had
been leaping round with eager and unrestrained curiosity
amongst the merry guests were called by the bailiff, and
how each was given a big portion of crayfish to eat at
the table. Breathlessly Peter held fast to his branch and
communed with the whispering gloom of the great, dark
tree top.</p>

<p>Then an old fellow rose and thanked the host. He
fumbled with his wine glass and now and then squeezed
out a word, just as if he had been on the point of suffocation
before he got it out. And his shadow, ragged and
giantlike, mounted the loosening plaster of the walls of
Selambshof.</p>

<p>“Kalle Brundin,” he shouted, “Kalle Brundin! All here
present join with me! And what do we join in? We join
in the belief that this has been a damned fine party.
Damned jolly to see you out here in your old Selambshof!
Thank you, Kalle Brundin! A fourfold hurrah for Kalle
Brundin and his Selambshof. May he live long: hip, hip,
hurrah!”</p>

<p>In reply Kalle Brundin pointed with an elegant gesture
to the landing stage and the steamer. And instantly the
whole company stumbled towards it, so that the table was
deserted.</p>

<p>Sssh! Bang! there went the first rocket. And then came
cracking grasshoppers and divers that fizzed and spluttered
in the water, and golden rains that vomited sparks
round the gate posts, and bright Roman candles, and then
rockets again and crackers and starlights.</p>

<p>Peter slipped down out of the tree. This was too much.
He shrank as if the sparks had rained in his eyes. What
was it that sparkled and cracked but Brundin’s arrogance.
This abominable Brundin filled the skies with his violent,
sneering, exultant pride.</p>

<p>But amidst the smell of powder there came some odours
from the table and then it struck Peter that Brundin for
the moment was not guarding his interests on the terrace.
In a trice Peter was there. Like a frightened, thieving dog
he gulped down pieces of meat, cake and whatever was left
in the wine glasses. He had not time to taste anything
properly and half choked himself, but somehow it did him
good all the same. It was as if he had stolen back a little
of his own, and with a somewhat easier mind he stole away
into the darkness again.</p>

<p>The fireworks were over and the guests stumbled back to
their punch glasses again. But now it seemed as if the
last remnants of their dignity had vanished with the rockets.
Some fell down on the chairs as if their legs had been
struck off beneath them. And some stood with their arms
round each others’ necks, panting, as if they would drown
each other in friendship. And others were quarrelling with
raised voices that were lost among the shy shadows of the
still August night. But Brundin sat there unperturbed and
contented in the midst of the noise, like the devil at a horsefair,
smiling with half-closed eyes and puffing at his cigar.</p>

<p>Then Peter heard somebody come stamping out on the
kitchen stairs where he was sitting. It was old Kristin.
In the light of the lanterns which now caught fire and
flared up one after the other she raised her trembling, bony
arms like two withered branches. And she muttered a long
string of reproaches and threats against the impious bailiff
and his inhuman company. When she caught sight of Peter
her voice, which seemed to have been worn down to a pale,
feeble thread by all the unhappiness and misery of this
world, broke and putting her cold, withered hand on his
head, she said: “You poor orphan children! We all know
what happens to them. You will never grow up to sit at
Selambshof. No. No!”</p>

<p>Thereupon old Kristin stumped in again. But Peter felt
the chill of that withered, trembling hand through his
whole body right down to his toes.</p>

<p>Then Frida came carrying a tray of empty glasses, pursued
by panting and shouting figures, which let fall coins
in the pockets of her apron and in her hair and down her
plump neck inside her cotton blouse. But she looked over
their shoulders at Brundin, who was standing by the corner
of his wing of the house making some mysterious signs.</p>

<p>Then the whole company broke up and returned home by
land and down the avenue the babel of voices gradually
disappeared.</p>

<p>Peter was just going to bed. He did not light the lamp,
but sat for a moment balanced on the edge of the bed and
listening to Stellan’s breathing beside him. Then he crept
to the window again.</p>

<p>All was dark and silent. Only from a chink in a blind
in the bailiff’s wing a narrow streak of light cut the darkness.
Over the dusky house there hung the witchery of an
unknown fear. As Peter stared out he seemed to see a
shadow cross the yard and disappear under the lime tree
by Brundin’s porch. Peter stole quietly down the stairs
again. The sky had clouded over and it had become
strangely oppressive. There was soughing and whispering
in the darkness. Peter walked on the edge of the grass so
that the gravel should not crunch beneath his feet. In the
sweet smell under the lime tree he suddenly struck against
something soft, and heard a low, frightened cry.</p>

<p>It was Hedvig, his sister. He had not seen her the
whole evening. He pinched her arm:</p>

<p>“What are you doing here, girl?”</p>

<p>Hedvig was breathing heavily. Through the darkness he
could almost see how pale she was.</p>

<p>“Frida!” It escaped her in a whisper, and she pointed to
a window that stood open where the blind was drawn:
“There, there!”</p>

<p>Peter put his arm round her waist in order to pass her
on the narrow grass edge. She was trembling and she
seemed in a cold sweat, blended of shame, curiosity and
disgust.</p>

<p>“Go in again,” he mumbled harshly.</p>

<p>She gave a start as if he had struck her and ran in. But
Peter stepped noiselessly up to the open window. There
was light inside and he heard the sound of chairs being
moved, giggles and whispering. But it was impossible to
see anything. He carefully pushed aside the blind a little
with a pencil.</p>

<p>Between a box in the window and the corner of a yellow
wardrobe he could catch a glimpse over the end of the bed
of some curls of brown hair and a big, dark hand that
pressed against something soft and white.</p>

<p>Peter wanted to lift the blind higher but then a bottle
on the window-sill tipped over and an arm was stretched
out and put out the lamp.</p>

<p>He ran away as if possessed.</p>

<p>Now he lies stretched out on his bed, staring into the darkness.
He lies as still as a terrified insect feigning death.</p>

<p>Fancy that it was Frida—the Frida who brought in his
shoes and clothes in the morning!</p>

<p>Hitherto when Peter had looked at the girl he felt a
certain uneasiness in her presence—an uneasiness which
found expression chiefly in giggles and rudeness. But
nothing in the world would have induced him to touch
her.</p>

<p>But Brundin dared! For him nothing was forbidden
and nothing dangerous. He did everything he liked.</p>

<p>By contrast with his own helplessness Brundin became
a monster of power and impudence.</p>

<p>The darkness became oppressive round the poor boy, he
suddenly felt the girl in his inmost being, in the very marrow
of his bone. But not her alone, that was the horror of
it! This man whom he dreaded, his pet horror was also
there. His feelings were a strange mixture of shame, lust,
fear, powerlessness, loneliness and grief. The very springs
of life were diverted and unclean from the beginning. Even
his first dreams of awakening were sullied by anxiety, and
by cowardly, curious hate.</p>

<p>The more tired Peter became the more distinctly did he
feel how the chill of old Kristin’s hand passed through his
body. And Frida dissolved and disappeared. But Brundin
remained. He pursued Peter deep into the night’s sleep.</p>

<p>His sleep was like that of one in a besieged fortress,
where one hears the shots shattering bit by bit the walls
that save one from destruction.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Yes, this was the story of Peter the Watch-dog.</p>

<p>We must not forget that this thin and anxious figure was
the embryo of the future coarse and brutal Peter the Boss.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">V<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">FEAR</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Excited and curious, Frida thrust her head into the
girls’ room:</p>

<p>“If you please, Miss Hedvig,—you ought to let me
make your bed on a day like this.”</p>

<p>Hedvig was leaning over her narrow bed with her black
hair full of curling papers. She would soon be fifteen
years old now. Her breasts were already filling out beneath
her bodice. Her lips were very red, and looked
almost skinless, in her long pale face.</p>

<p>“No,” she said vehemently, “Kristin must come up.”</p>

<p>For some time past Hedvig had made her own bed. She
could not bear Frida to touch anything of hers. She seemed
to shiver as in a cold draught and her teeth began to chatter
as soon as the plump, laughing hussy came near her. But
the maid did not pay her back in the same coin. The excellent
Frida had no stiff-necked pride. With a mixture of
good nature and bad conscience she only became more servile.
“Kristin? very well.”</p>

<p>Humming softly as usual she vanished down the stairs.</p>

<p>Laura yawned, stretched herself lazily and shook her
fair hair. For all her laziness her arch eyes sparkled. She
was not in the least like her elder sister:</p>

<p>“You really are mad, Hedvig,” she said, jumping out of
the bed.</p>

<p>Then Kristin came puffing and muttering up the stairs.
Her old black frock had not shrunk as she herself had
done, and it seemed almost empty when she sank down on
the edge of the bed. Her hands twitched and trembled as
if they had gone to sleep in her lap and were dreaming of
knitting needles.</p>

<p>“Well, Hedvig, do you know your catechism, so that
we need not be ashamed of you?”</p>

<p>Laura came up, stark naked, with a lather of soap on
her neck:</p>

<p>“Know her catechism? when she is overflowing with it!”</p>

<p>The old woman had no smile for this fresh, plump young
thing.</p>

<p>“Are you not ashamed, child, to talk like that of God’s
word? And you won’t be ready in time either.”</p>

<p>Hedvig had done her hair and Kristin helped her on
with the white frock that reached almost to her ankles. She
fumbled a long time with the fastenings at the back, and
then she arranged the pleats with bony, trembling fingers.</p>

<p>“Just like dressing a little bride,” she muttered. “And
truth it is that it is the best of bridegrooms you are meeting
today!”</p>

<p>But behind Kristin’s back Hedvig stole a glance at herself
in the mirror. It was with a shy, unsteady look she
saw her own image. There was not a spark of fresh and
natural joy.</p>

<p>Now it was breakfast time. The other children, arrayed
in their poor best, were already sitting round the table. But
it was impossible to get Hedvig down. She remained in
the little girls’ room, and in the end Kristin had to take a
plate of porridge to her. Laura also soon came running
back. A new frock was anyhow a new frock. And this
was almost the beginning of long skirts and putting the
hair up. And perhaps she might even see Hedvig cry!</p>

<p>A carriage was heard crunching the gravel outside. Hedvig
jumped up. It was only old Hermansson. Yes! of
course he must come with them. She sank down on her
chair again. Laura was looking at her with big greedy
eyes, purring like a cat.</p>

<p>“<i>He</i> is also coming,” she said suddenly in a sleek little
voice. “I heard him order the dog-cart.”</p>

<p>Hedvig turned pale, just as one’s knuckles whiten when
one clenches one’s fist.</p>

<p>“What <i>he</i>?”</p>

<p>“Mr. Brundin, of course.”</p>

<p>Over Hedvig’s face spread an expression of anxious and
obstinate defiance which made it look almost old. Everybody
was waiting about for an opportunity to point her
out, everybody—</p>

<p>“What right has he to come. His place is among the
farmhands.” And with that she pushed Laura out of the
room and locked the door.</p>

<p>But then she stole to the window and stood there hidden
by the curtain.</p>

<p>Then the bailiff, Brundin, came driving in his little
dog-cart. He wore a fur coat, a top hat thrust back on
his head, and red dogskin gloves.</p>

<p>Hedvig devoured him with her eyes, just like a boy who
steals his first glass of strong drink, and is frightened when
it burns his throat. Then she caught sight of Peter. He
was standing some distance away with his coarse red hands
hanging out of his short sleeves. He pulled a face at the
bailiff and then looked furtively up at the girls’ room.
Hedvig ran away from the window, and sat down in a
corner fidgetting with her handkerchief. She looked as
if she had been struck.</p>

<p>Now they were calling her. Now she <i>must</i> go down—“God!
if only it were over,” she thought. Stiffly and
hesitatingly, as if afraid to lose her balance, she greeted
old Hermansson. But she shot past the outstretched hand
of Brundin as if impelled by an invisible force, rushed out
to the carriage and crept into a corner. With her pale face
and her screwed-up eyes, she looked like some strange
creature of the twilight which had been forced out into the
merciless spring sunshine.</p>

<p>Old Kristin had to run after her with her coat and hat.</p>

<p>At last the carriage was full and they started off. Out
in the yard in the sunshine it was still temptingly warm.
The lilac bushes had great green buds and the damp soil
of the flower beds was steaming round the bulbs. But in
the avenue they met the cold air from the dirty snow in the
ditches. And whenever a little cloud hid the sun for a
moment, they were back in winter again. It was one of
those treacherous and dangerous days when the cautious
and the wise, such as old Hermansson, prefer to keep their
fur coats on.</p>

<p>It was some distance to the Church, which was situated
at a crossing of two roads, by the side of a plain which
was chequered by the black, brown, and green of fallow
land, pastures, and young rye.</p>

<p>Behind it rose a bare slope sprinkled with juniper trees
which resembled dark solid flames. The Church was very
old, without a tower. With its high black roof, its coarse
walls of rustic stone, it resembled a fortress, a barn, or a
cellar. And there was a musty smell beneath the vaulted
roof, for in spite of the big rusty stove, the cold winter
air still lingered.</p>

<p>With the troop of children close upon his heels old
Hermansson squeezed himself into the high narrow pew.
He did so the more calmly as the pew was at this moment
the most respectable place. But to Mr. Brundin the hard
wooden seat of duty at once seemed repugnant.</p>

<p>Hedvig stealthily joined the other children who were to
be confirmed, and sat down under the pulpit.</p>

<p>The clergyman was an old shaggy-bearded man with a
face like granite and reindeer-moss. This teacher of Our
Lord began the catechism in a dry, hard voice, as if he
were engaged in an interrogation on the four rules of
arithmetic rather than in partaking of the divine sacrament.
In this severe old Church, confronted by this severe old
man, the gospel seemed to be a vain mockery and punishment,
the great punishment, the only reality. It was
strange to hear the young girlish voices answer his lifeless
voice as it spelled out, without a spark of fire, the long
record of judgment. It was as if Death had been sitting
on a stone and piped a tune on a dry bone, while frightened
Echo answered from the green shores of life. There was in
the quick, breathless repetition of the lesson every degree
of fear, from the side-glance which would avoid the whip,
down to the low trembling sigh that dies out in a sob. But
he who had ears to hear would nevertheless have been
startled by Hedvig’s voice. She knew her lesson and her
voice did not shake, but there was something unnaturally
tense, something of keenest anguish in her voice.</p>

<p>What sort of a God was it whom Hedvig feared and
whom she was to receive today at the altar rails. Let us
pause to reflect on his origin and on his history, which is
much older than Hedvig’s first meeting with the clergyman.
From the beginning, he was a God from the Servants’ Hall
and he was an inheritance from Hedvig’s first horror, the
Bogey Man!</p>

<p>We never escape from our first impressions and experiences.
They bind us with the fibres of deep-seated roots
which we never draw up into the full light of consciousness.</p>

<p>There Kristin, severe and foreboding, stood over the
little sugar thief whom she had caught: “Hedvig, if you
do not leave the sugar box alone, the Bogey Man will come
and take you.”</p>

<p>From the beginning these two experiences blended, and
each by unfortunate association strengthened the influence of
the other. The more frightened she grew of the Bogey
Man, the more she thought of the sugar box, and the more
she thought of the sugar box, the more frightened she grew
of the Bogey Man. At last he overshadowed her whole
existence. He was in the dark hole under the kitchen
stairs; in Kristin’s big black book; in the dull eyes of her
moribund apoplectic father, in the hawk-like face of her
grandfather in there over the green sofa. The darker it
grew, the more dangerous the Bogey Man became. She ate
her supper slowly, slowly, in order to postpone the
inevitable. Alone and silent in her fear, she sat amongst
her sisters and brothers who romped and struggled round
about her. Then they were driven to bed. “Please, Kristin,
don’t pull down the blind. Dear Kristin, please leave the
lamp a little longer.”</p>

<p>It was no use. In vain she pulled the bedclothes over
her head, the Bogey Man was still there, the blackest thing
in the darkness. And he came sneaking into her dreams
and groped with his shadow hands about her little trembling
heart so that she often awoke with a loud shriek in the
middle of the night.</p>

<p>In her terror, Hedvig attached herself more and more
closely to old Kristin, who knew all about all these
ominous mysteries. And thus it came about that God
succeeded to the Bogey Man.</p>

<p>But this intimacy during the long hours of twilight with
an old, tired, and harried creature who had not the sense to
spare tender ears, was dangerous. In everyday life Kristin’s
God was a mean and nagging kitchen-God whose chief
business was to punish the maids’ laziness and pilfering.
But he had also his greater and more threatening moods
when he emerged from his past in a small soldiers’ cottage
in a mighty Småland forest in order to punish incendiaries
and murderers and to look after brownies and trolls. When
on Sunday evenings Kristin sat reading aloud from the Old
Testament her voice would assume an expression of cruel
lamentation, something submissively threatening which
gripped Hedvig with a deep awe of the people through the
dim and distant ages.</p>

<p>In the dark, Hedvig grew frightened of God. Not even
school when it began with its monotonous and mechanical
cramming, not even the alleviating joys of companionship,
could kill her fear. Amidst the noise of the class-room
she sat alone in communion with both the great and the
dangerous. Before she could read properly, she spelled
out greedily and eagerly the tale of the fall of man and the
ten commandments. Especially the seventh commandment
made a deep impression on her. Here was the terrible fascination
of the unknown. By and by she began to read the
Bible for herself. There was much to brood over, much
that nourished her fears, which now began to undergo
strange transformation. She could sit for hours thinking of
such expressions as “circumcision,” “menstruation,” then
she imagined she bore a son. Her gaze fastened on passages
concerning the sin of fornication, the great Babylonian
harlot, Absolom’s exploits on the roof of the house
with King David’s concubines.</p>

<p>The darkness enclosing Hedvig’s God began to be
oppressive. His too early threats provoked the very sins
which he intended to prevent. She brooded over evil till
at last it began to stir in her blood. Her ever present fear
developed into stealthy, premature curiosity. It was no
longer anything so white and innocent as sugar that Hedvig
now stole. No! In the forbidden box now lay worm
eaten, half rotten fruit fallen from the tree of knowledge
of good and evil. But there was still the same fatal and
even more intimate association of ideas as in the case of
the sugar and the Bogey Man.</p>

<p>Soon Hedvig’s curiosity found something different from
the shadowy figures of the old rat-eaten family Bible to
brood over and to spy out, namely, the bailiff and Frida.</p>

<p>That sultry night when Peter caught her peeping under
the blind into Brundin’s window had been a fateful night
in her life. The discovery of the secret of the bailiff’s
wing was the greatest and most dangerous discovery she had
yet made. Hot and cold by turns, tempted, frightened,
caught in the act, she had crept to bed. Her soul was outraged.
Night and day the memory of that scene remained
with her. She was afraid of Peter, disgusted with Frida,
but could not get the man out of her thoughts. It was like
an obsession. She avoided him, scarcely greeted him, could
not for anything in the world look him in the face. But
secretly she devoured him with her eyes. His bold, wicked
self-assurance had some inexpressible allurement for her.
She found herself incessantly following this sinner, and
then fled, frightened and ashamed, to her bed. But as
she had shaped her God out of fear, he had no pity and
could not help her. This girlish love might have been the
means of leading her out into the fresh air if it had not been
of such a strange and stunted kind. As it was, it only
threw her back more and more upon herself.</p>

<p>Such was the Hedvig who now knelt by the altar rails
and received the bread and the wine from the hand of the
old clergyman. She had grown up in the shadow of her
own dreams like one of those long white shoots that grew
down in the deep darkness. Not one poor single little bud
of her being had been able to open out in the clear sunshine
of the busy, living world. In a pew behind sat the genteel
farmer, Brundin, with his pert military moustache, not for
a moment suspecting that he was a terrible Behemoth, sucking
the nourishment out of a poor little woman’s soul.</p>

<p>Communion was over. The girls rose with tear-stained
faces and walked slowly, hesitatingly, down the aisle. Hedvig
was pale and dry-eyed. Outside it had suddenly begun
to snow, wet ice-cold snow, and it was pathetic to see her
as she stood amongst these thinly clad, shivering children,
slowly and awkwardly bidding each other good-bye, and
looking like butterflies that have left their chrysalis too
soon and have no flowers to rest on. The girl from Selambshof
was better dressed than the poor peasant girls.
And she was the prettiest of them too. But she looked
more forlorn and colder than the poor lonely little snow-drops
that shivered amongst the snowflakes on a poor man’s
grave behind her.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson had something to say to the Vicar.
Brundin came up to Hedvig and made his compliments.</p>

<p>“Well, Hedvig, that went off splendidly! Now you are
a big grown-up lady and I suppose I must call you Miss
Hedvig. But we must not let it snow any longer on your
white hat.”</p>

<p>He led her to the carriage which was waiting with the
hood up, helped her in and fastened the apron. Hedvig
drew back as if his touch had scorched her. When he had
gone she sat there trembling and with chattering teeth.
Will he drive before or after us, she thought. If he drives
before us, I can sit and look at him the whole time. But
when her guardian at last arrived and they started with
Brundin in front, she stared obstinately at a hole in the
apron, because she was afraid of God.</p>

<p>Both old Hermansson and Brundin were to stay for dinner.
A gloomy snow light filled the dining-room and there
was a fire burning, just as in mid-winter. Hedvig sat
stiff and silent in the place of honour, and scarcely tasted
the food. Then her guardian solemnly drew forth a present
from his coat pocket. It was a little watch with Hedvig’s
initials engraved on it. He made a short admonitory
speech before giving it to her and hoped that she would
learn to make the same good use of time as he had done
when he was young. He even finished with a little verse:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c011">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“May this watch the right time tell</div>
      <div class="line">To a little girl who works right well.”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c003">Hedvig sat fidgetting on her chair with downcast eyes, as
if she were being scolded. It was with difficulty that she
stood up and returned thanks for the gift with a stiff curtsey.</p>

<p>Now it was Brundin’s turn to put his hand in his
pocket. He pulled out a red case, opened the lid with a
snap and, bowing gallantly, handed her a narrow gold
brooch.</p>

<p>“Well, Miss Hedvig, I also take the liberty of offering a
simple little gift. Please accept it, Miss Hedvig. Hall-marked!”</p>

<p>Hedvig blanched. Her glass trembled against the edge
of her plate as she set it down. Her dark eyes fastened,
wide-open with fright, on a spot on the wall opposite. She
stretched out her hand like a blind man and groped for the
case. But she stopped half way. She had suddenly caught
sight of Frida, who, with a bottle of port in one hand and a
napkin in the other, forgot her duties and bent over Brundin’s
shoulder to stare greedily at the glittering ornament.
Hedvig’s voice, unnaturally tense, suddenly cut the silence:</p>

<p>“No, I don’t want the brooch—give it to ... to Frida
instead.”</p>

<p>She covered her face with her hands and ran upstairs and
threw herself on her bed.</p>

<p>Nobody round the table said anything. Frida tittered a
little. Then she stood crimson and fidgetted for a moment
before she could pull herself together and go out. Brundin
muttered something that sounded like a curse, and sat
silently playing with his little fair moustache, looking half
embarrassed and half self-satisfied. Peter almost collapsed
with excitement.</p>

<p>Now Brundin will be kicked out, he thought, and an
agreeable, cold shiver passed through his bones. Old
Hermansson had become rigid, with his spoon half way between
his mouth and his plate and looking very upset. At
last Laura’s voice broke the spell:</p>

<p>“Hedvig is mad,” she said and jumped up as she sat on
her chair, for she had a curious trick of being able to
jump whilst sitting.</p>

<p>“There now, she is spoiling everything,” thought Peter,
and gave her a pinch under the table. Quite right, old
Hermansson did not seize Brundin by the collar and kick
him out. Instead he rose with slow dignity, and took up
the case and the brooch:</p>

<p>“I will teach this ill-bred girl how to receive a well-meant
gift,” he said, with an air that promised full amends
to Brundin. Then he stalked off after Hedvig.</p>

<p>He found her lying full length on her bed in her white
frock, which looked like a shroud. She lay there dry-eyed
staring up at the ceiling.</p>

<p>“Now put this brooch in your frock, Hedvig, and go
down and say thank you nicely,” he said.</p>

<p>A shiver passed through her and the skin on her thin
arms looked like goose flesh.</p>

<p>“Please, please, leave me alone,” she begged.</p>

<p>“Put the brooch on at once!”</p>

<p>“No, no, it is sinful,” she stammered and turned her
face to the wall.</p>

<p>Then old Hermansson thought he ought not to insist
any longer. He left the case on the table beside the bed
and went downstairs again.</p>

<p>“The poor child has had a trying day today,” he said
to the bailiff. “She seems strangely upset. I thought I
ought to let her put off her apologies.”</p>

<p>Then he returned to his tart.</p>

<p>But up in her room Hedvig lay with the red case on her
breast. Suddenly she tore out the brooch and stuck the
pin deep into her left hand. Then she sucked drop after
drop of the slowly oozing blood.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VI<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE TWO FAIR HEADS</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">The terrace at Selambshof was adorned with two small
ship’s-guns on gun-carriages of decayed oak. They
were spiked with pine-needles and twigs, and it was
long since a birthday salute had been fired with them.
Laura sat astride of one of these, swinging her legs lazily
and catching maple-blossoms in her hat. It was a fine
day in the beginning of June, and with each breeze there
rained down over the old cannon golden green maple blossoms,
and the pools glistened after the night’s rain.</p>

<p>Sometimes it almost looked as if an idyl could exist
even in the presence of the sham Gothic of Selambshof.</p>

<p>The sun gently warmed the fair down on Laura’s neck.
She kept behind the house today, because she had put up
her hair for the first time, though only for fun, of course.
She thought it would be jolly to see what sort of a face
Herman would make. He would probably appear in the
avenue soon.</p>

<p>Otherwise it was rather empty at Selambshof this summer.
Peter was laid up with measles. And there was not
even Hedvig to quarrel with. She had been sent away to
an old aunt in Sala. Usually she had sat and sulked in a
corner since the day when she behaved so idiotically to
Brundin. It was impossible to get her down into the garden,
for she was frightened to approach the bailiff’s quarters.
And when into the bargain old Kristin died she
became so refractory that old Hermansson had to send her
away.</p>

<p>Not that Laura understood the reason. But when she
sat lonely like this and looked at the shadows of the leaves
dancing and jumping about and overtaking each other
down on the gravel, it amused her to think of that story.
And then suddenly Laura thought of Herman again. Why
was he really so anxious to be alone with her lately?
Herman was not like his old self, no—there was something
strange about him.</p>

<p>There he was already in the avenue!</p>

<p>Yes, there was Herman Hermansson coming up, with his
schoolcap on the back of his head and swinging a stick.
He tried to look quite unconcerned and indifferent. But
he did not succeed, because secretly he stole anxious glances
on all sides, and even his whistle sounded somehow shy,
humble and supplicating.</p>

<p>Laura’s little woman’s heart beat happily and she felt a
gay and mischievous wish to play a little with old Hermansson’s
tall, fine boy. So she hurried into the kitchen before
he had caught sight of her.</p>

<p>There sat Miss Isaksson, the new housekeeper. She was
tall, pale, and thin, and she held the coffee grinder in one
hand and a fat novel in the other. And she ground and
read and nodded her head sadly to herself.</p>

<p>Laura peeped out of the window.</p>

<p>“Do they get married?” she giggled.</p>

<p>“I won’t look at the end,” sighed Miss Isaksson, “but it
is a sad book, so they will probably both die.”</p>

<p>Now Herman was on the terrace. He glanced shyly
round him and had a guilty look. Laura was enjoying herself
and did not hurry. She had a vague feeling of superiority
over both Herman and poor, thin Miss Isaksson. At
last she was pleased to emerge on the steps with an air of
marked indifference and boredom.</p>

<p>Herman jumped up as if someone had commanded “attention!”
He certainly did not dare to make any comment
on Laura’s having put her hair up, for that only increased
his shyness and diffidence.</p>

<p>“Will you come fishing with me for a bit, Laura?”</p>

<p>“What! fishing?”</p>

<p>“Do, please, only for a short time.”</p>

<p>“Well, perhaps I will, if Stellan comes too.”</p>

<p>It was always the same, Stellan had to be there too, and
so Herman was forced against his will to go and persuade
that young lordling, who lay in a tattered old hammock in
the park, staring at his toes, to join them. Only after a
long discussion did he lazily get out of the hammock.</p>

<p>At last three floats bobbed about on the half-clear, glittering,
greenish June water which can look so warm and inviting
from the shore and is yet so icy cold when you venture
in.</p>

<p>Stellan had the first bite.</p>

<p>“What rotten fish! Not worth while getting dirty for!”</p>

<p>He was in a bad temper. It irritated him that Herman
could find any pleasure in putting on worms for that fat
Laura.</p>

<p>Now it was Herman’s turn. His float dived deep down
without his noticing it; he was so absorbed in Laura. And
when at last he awoke he pulled so violently that the roach
got free and the hook caught in Laura’s hat. Then Laura
scolded him and Stellan shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>“Were you hoarse yesterday, Herman?” he said in a cold,
mocking voice.</p>

<p>This formula had a crushing effect. Once when Herman
had been reproved because he did not know his history
lesson he had stood up and said: “Please sir, I was so
hoarse yesterday that I could not learn my lesson.” Since
then he was always asked the unfortunate question:
“Were you hoarse yesterday, Herman?” And each time
Laura laughed heartily. It was a cause of inexpressible
suffering to his proud, chivalrous nature. Herman tried
to keep up an appearance of gay indifference and to join
in the laugh of these cruel companions. But his was a
poor, weak mockery of a laugh.</p>

<p>They were already thoroughly tired of fishing and began
to jump about on the stones and the roots of the alder trees
along the shore. This year’s reeds were just beginning to
come up between the yellow stalks of last year’s, the dragon
flies flew past like blue, silken threads in a current of air,
and dark, green beetles hovered up and down like little
balls supported by an invisible force. The day was almost
too warm and fine. They could not make up their minds
to do anything—they only teased each other and had their
little quarrels. Now they are amongst the cows in the
Hökar meadow, and Herman catches sight of a starling
hopping between the hind legs of the bell-cow and incessantly
flying up to catch a fly on its udders.</p>

<p>“Look at that starling, Laura!” he cried, proud of the
interesting observation he had made. “Look at that starling,
he is friendly with the cow.”</p>

<p>“That’s nothing compared with Egypt,” snapped Stellan.
“There the birds come and pick the teeth of the crocodiles.
And they keep their mouths quite still. But of course,
you haven’t heard of that.”</p>

<p>No, Herman had not heard of that, so probably he had
been hoarse again.</p>

<p>Then Laura had an idea. She drew her brother aside.</p>

<p>“I say, Stellan, shall we get Herman to climb the
oak?”</p>

<p>It was an enormous oak growing on a green hillock by
the roadside, just where the avenue ended.</p>

<p>“All right!”</p>

<p>They sat down on a stone in the shade. Stellan looked
up at the tree with the eyes of an expert.</p>

<p>“I say, Herman, that is an awfully difficult tree.”</p>

<p>“Not so very. If it weren’t so hot....”</p>

<p>“Yes, the first bit is easy. I can see that too—but further
up there is a long bit without branches.”</p>

<p>“Nonsense. You can swing yourself up. If it weren’t
so warm....”</p>

<p>“Of course—you can brag—but you daren’t do it,” scoffed
Laura.</p>

<p>“Daren’t I?”</p>

<p>“No, you daren’t.”</p>

<p>Herman jumped up, red in the face, and tore off his
coat. At last he had a chance of shining, and of dazzling
the cruel one by a knightly deed.</p>

<p>“I’ll show you whether I dare!” he cried.</p>

<p>And then he began to climb. It really was a difficult
tree. His fingers were already bleeding and, ritsch! he
tore one of his shirt sleeves. For a moment he was on the
point of falling down. The perspiration stood out on his
forehead and his heart beat fast. But he set his teeth and
struggled on. <i>She</i> was standing down there admiring him.</p>

<p>Now he had reached the very top swaying in the wind.
Breathless he pushed away a branch in order to be seen
and to enjoy his triumph.</p>

<p>But the stone was empty. Nobody was visible.</p>

<p>“Laura,” he called, “Laura, do you see that I was not
afraid?”</p>

<p>No answer. Down below everything was green, silent
and empty. Above, abandoned, covered with dirt from
the wet bark, Herman was sitting up among the whispering,
swaying masses of leaves. His hands were aching, and he
had an unpleasant sensation in his stomach. Most of all
he would like to throw himself down and break his neck
in order to punish a hard and unfeeling world.</p>

<p>He resisted this temptation, however, and climbed down
with moderate care; he put on his coat and walked home
in order to grind at the subjects in which he had failed in
his examination last spring. You could see even by his
back that he was deeply hurt and had nothing left but
duty to live for.</p>

<p>But Laura stepped out from behind one of the trees in
the avenue where she had been hiding with Stellan. She
smiled and danced and her voice rang out clear and mocking
in the mellow summer air:</p>

<p>“Were you hoarse yesterday, Herman? Were you
hoarse yesterday?”</p>

<p>Herman did not answer. Only his back stiffened still
more and he took still longer steps. And then he disappeared
behind the willows by the wash house.</p>

<p>The next day Laura again sat astride the gun catching
maple blossoms in her hat and looking down the avenue
now and then, ready to begin the jolly game over again.</p>

<p>But that was not to be. Herman did not come. It was
almost dinner time and still Herman did not come. “I
see, he is sulking,” thought Laura. “Well, let him!”
And with her nose in the air she hopped away to the lean
Miss Isaksson and borrowed a big novel.</p>

<p>But Stellan was lying in the hammock like a fish in a
net and yawned and became more and more sleepy and
bad-tempered. At last he climbed out, however, opened
the gate with a kick, without taking his hands out of his
pockets, and slipped down to the jetty where the washing
and rinsing was done, and where Selambshof’s rotten old
rowing boat lay hopelessly water-logged and simply could
not be made water tight.</p>

<p>“What an establishment this Selambshof! What a dilapidated,
dull, impossible, old place!”</p>

<p>And just at this moment the special steamer with the
usual Stonehill party for the summer arrived. He could
see little Percy in white sailor trousers walking along the
pier.</p>

<p>Stonehill lay on the other shore opposite Selambshof.
It was an awfully fine place with a big globe mirror and
white plaster statues and coloured glass windows round
the verandahs, as was the fashion in the villas of the well-to-do
at that time. And there were temples and hothouses
with peaches and grapes, for Percy’s mother was
awfully rich. His father had got his money by smuggling
during the war in America. But now he was dead.</p>

<p>Stellan kicked angrily at what was left above water of
the old rowing boat. How could he get across to Stonehill
now?</p>

<p>It was only last summer that he had made the acquaintance
of the “china doll.” He called Percy Hill “china
doll” because he looked so brittle and so fine. That summer
he had also had plenty of fun on the lake with Manne
von Strelert at Kolsnäs, for Manne never wanted to be at
home because his tutor was there. Stellan thought this
was a pity, because there was nothing he admired so much
as the horses at Kolsnäs. But Manne was so obstinate!
And there was added spice in their excursions on the lake
since they had noticed the boy in white stealing behind the
rose hedge and the fine, high fence at Stonehill, and gazing
enviously at them. In order to tease him they used to
hover about the Stonehill landing stage. One day Manne
called out:</p>

<p>“Won’t you come out on the lake with us?”</p>

<p>“I’m not allowed.”</p>

<p>“Come out on the landing stage, then.”</p>

<p>“Mother is afraid I might tumble in.”</p>

<p>“What have you got a sailor’s suit on for, then?”</p>

<p>The boy could not answer. He was a prisoner of the
roses. He was a poor little land sailor, and the two sunburnt
sailors jeered at him mercilessly.</p>

<p>“You’re a beastly coward,” called Manne. “I have ridden
the legs off a horse and I have thrashed my tutor. You
are a beastly coward.”</p>

<p>Then the boy in white stepped out on to the stage.</p>

<p>“My name is Percy,” he said with a wan, little smile,
“and I am not a coward.”</p>

<p>Then he climbed into Stellan’s boat.</p>

<p>“Now, let us see who can splash the other most!” cried
Manne, and Percy was wet through at once.</p>

<p>“Now you will be spanked when you get home.”</p>

<p>Percy’s face looked troubled.</p>

<p>“No, but I shall have to go to bed. And then the doctor
will come, of course.”</p>

<p>At this stage in their acquaintance Stellan suddenly
checked Manne’s arrogance and changed his tactics. He
had suddenly come to think of all the fine things visible
through the railings round Stonehill.</p>

<p>“Take off your coat and spread it out on the seat and it
will soon dry,” he said.</p>

<p>Percy obeyed. After a moment’s reflection Stellan continued,
“So you never get a thrashing?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Percy with something of a sigh.</p>

<p>“Must you go without your dinner, then?”</p>

<p>“Without dinner?” asked Percy astonished, “they stuff me
with food.”</p>

<p>This somehow appealed to Stellan.</p>

<p>“Perhaps you are allowed to eat as much as you like in
the hothouses,” he mumbled, almost shyly.</p>

<p>“Of course,” answered Percy with indifference.</p>

<p>“May I come with you some time?”</p>

<p>“Yes, come tomorrow, both of you, and we’ll have fruit
juice and biscuits first, and then go into the hothouses.”</p>

<p>It was in this way Stellan penetrated beyond the high,
white fence round Stonehill. From the beginning he tried
to imitate the aristocratic indifference of the “china doll”
to all the good things to eat. Except, of course, when he
thought nobody was looking, and then he gobbled up all he
could. Worldly wisdom and fine manners are all very well,
but we are only human after all....</p>

<p>Yes, all this had happened the year before. Now he was
cut off from all that splendour, because of the rotten old
boat, and the gardener’s tarred punt he was ashamed to go
in.</p>

<p>Stellan was already walking away from the pier, where
the water glittered and beat so mockingly against the wet
boards, when it suddenly struck him that at Ekbacken old
Hermansson had a smart little craft that was decorated every
Sunday with a fine display of streamers in the stem, and
a flag in the stern.</p>

<p>“I was beastly stupid, yesterday,” he thought, “beastly
stupid,” and his usual expression, the cool, half-sneer
returned.</p>

<p>Stellan stole cautiously across the park so as not to be
seen or have Laura on his heels. From the bend in the avenue
he got a good view of Ekbacken. And he stopped a
moment, impressed by the sight. It seemed as if he were
looking at Ekbacken for the first time. An expression of
amazing cunning came into Stellan’s face, as he passed in
through the red wooden gateway. Already his thoughts
travelled far, far beyond to old Hermansson’s fine, little
boat.</p>

<p>Ekbacken Sawmill and Shipyard was a fine, old business
that ran itself. Trustworthy, leisurely, old workers stalked
about on the timber rafts inside the boom, and there were
steady, old, grey sailors who had sailed in all the seas of
the world and were caulking old brigs and barges. And
inside in the office sat the book-keeper Lundbom, with eyeglasses
and a leather shade, writing out bills to a lot of
good and safe customers, who paid in cash and not with
miserable acceptances. There also sat old Hermansson
reading his paper. There was such a blessed peace that he
had smoked half his cigar and the ash was still on it.</p>

<p>He looked up at Stellan with an expression of fatherly
benevolence.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, my dear boy. You are looking for
Herman, I suppose, but he is at his lessons now. Yes, that’s
what happens when you flunk. Come along now, and let
us have a talk.”</p>

<p>Stellan asked for nothing better. They went over to
the house in a pretty oak wood just by the road to town.
On the other side spread soft, billowing, green fields set
with old, brown barns. This land also belonged to Ekbacken,
but was let to tobacco growers. On the town side the
estate was sheltered by some stony hillocks with a few pines
here and there, behind which, however, some high, bare
walls had entirely shot up and threatened to destroy the
idyl.</p>

<p>The house itself was an old, but well-preserved one story
house, long and low, where everything from the door
handles to the brass doors of the Marieberg earthenware
stoves was radiantly clean and polished.</p>

<p>“Why have I not been to Ekbacken more often?” thought
Stellan.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson talked about school and praised Herman
because he had worked hard, which praise the young man
listened to with an open countenance. It opened up further
vistas to him. Cleverly he manœuvred the conversation in
the direction he wanted. School and school friends, of
course! There was Manne at Kolsnäs. He was a jolly
decent fellow. And his father, who was a chamberlain to
the King, could come and go at court just as he pleased.
And they had footmen and horses and everything else. It
really was strange that Herman did not see more of Manne.
Manne liked Herman awfully. He had told Stellan so—and
fancy what fun it would be for Manne to look at all
the boats in the yard. And Percy Hill. Didn’t Mr. Hermansson
know him and how tremendously rich he was.
And Percy was so awfully generous and kind and obedient.
Mr. Hermansson would certainly like him....</p>

<p>It became clearer and clearer to Stellan. It was as if he
could look straight through old Hermansson and discover
his little vanity. Victory seemed already secure, when at
last he got out his real purpose. It would soon be his birthday.
He had been so often in Manne’s and Percy’s houses
that he was really ashamed and wanted most awfully to invite
them to something in return. But he could not do so at
home, as Mr. Hermansson would understand. There was
poor father who was nothing for strangers to look at.
And besides, Peter had measles. So wouldn’t it be nice if
Mr. Hermansson would be so awfully kind as to let him
have a little party here at Ekbacken, where everything was
so fine and elegant. And as to the cost, well, his mother
had left Stellan something and he might use that.</p>

<p>“Nonsense, my boy,” beamed old Hermansson, “I will
give a little dinner for you with pleasure.”</p>

<p>Then Stellan rushed into Herman and slapped him on the
back:</p>

<p>“I say, you’re not angry still, are you? We’ll stick together—what?”</p>

<p>Herman, in the loneliness of his heart, was not the one
to reject a word of reconciliation.</p>

<p>Next day they rigged out old Hermansson’s little lugger.
For many years it had done nothing but lie by the pier
and look smart, for old Hermansson was rather afraid of
the lake, even though he was owner of a shipyard. But
now, as I have already mentioned, the boat was fitted out.
It was also the result of Stellan’s diabolical powers of persuasion
that the boys were permitted to sail the boat.
Herman had never dreamt of such happiness. They
started at once for Stonehill and Kolsnäs and conveyed
the invitation for the birthday party at Ekbacken.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>At home at Selambshof Laura sank into ever deeper and
deeper reflections. Herman no longer came up the avenue.
And Stellan was also away most of the time. Our young
lady felt lonely and very bored. Whenever she did get hold
of Stellan he only shrugged his shoulders and looked contemptuous.
And he always managed to get away without
her discovering where he went.</p>

<p>But one fine day when she was sitting on the landing
stage, there came a smart, white sailing boat gliding past.
At the foresail-sheet sat Herman. But astern Stellan was
lounging like a prince, his head against the tiller and his
feet up against the gunwale. When he caught sight of
Laura on the landing stage he put about so that Herman
should not notice her. And Laura was so dumbfounded and
furious that she did not call out to them. She roamed
about on the shore and felt deserted, cheated of her fun.
To crown all she saw Stellan try on an absolutely new,
black suit with long trousers which had been sent from town.</p>

<p>“What are you getting a new suit for?”</p>

<p>“I’m giving a dinner,” said Stellan carelessly.</p>

<p>“Where? Here?”</p>

<p>“No! At Herman’s. My birthday’s coming.”</p>

<p>“I suppose I am to come too?”</p>

<p>“No, it’s a men’s dinner, you see, ta-ta!” With that he
pushed Laura out of the room. The new suit was the logical
result of Stellan’s diplomacy. Hang it all, you can’t very
well appear in anything when you have such smart guests.</p>

<p>But Laura threw herself down on her bed and stared at
the ceiling. She did not cry—but she wanted to tear her
face. “How stupid I have been,” she thought, “goodness,
how stupid I have been!”</p>

<p>Next morning she got up early. It was not yet nine
o’clock when she came dancing into her guardian’s room
at Ekbacken as he sat shaving with deliberate and methodical
dignity. She shone like a little sunbeam, and had a
bunch of the brightest wild flowers in her hand. Then she
ran about for a vase and placed it between the washbasin
and the soap dish, so that nobody could mistake the object
of her attention.</p>

<p>“How awfully good of you, uncle, to give a dinner for
Stellan.”</p>

<p>“And of course, you would love to come,” muttered her
guardian through the lather.</p>

<p>“Rather, as it is Stellan’s birthday. But there are to be
only boys?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but we ought to have a hostess, even though it is
a men’s dinner.”</p>

<p>Laura suddenly grew serious, terribly serious.</p>

<p>“Oh, but my old red frock is worn out, and besides the
sleeves are too short.”</p>

<p>“But supposing you came to town with me one day and
bought a new frock....”</p>

<p>Laura jumped up in his lap and kissed him in the middle
of the lather:</p>

<p>“Oh, thank you, dear darling. But don’t tell Stellan and
Herman!”</p>

<p>Thus it came about that when at last that birthday dinner
came off and the boys had already been down to look at
the sawmill and had been climbing in the shrouds of the
old brigs and had been chatting with the jolly old tars—who
should be standing on the front steps to receive them
like an amiable hostess but Laura, dressed in a brand new
silk frock, almost down to her ankles and full of bows and
frills.</p>

<p>For a moment Stellan frowned, but his face soon lit up
with involuntary approval. At least one didn’t need to feel
ashamed of the girl.</p>

<p>But Herman grew quite red in the face and was unable
to get out a sound, but stole in without daring to look at
her. She was altogether too lovely.</p>

<p>It was quite a smart dinner. Old Hermansson offered
wine and even made a little speech for the young people.
Speechmaking was his weakness.</p>

<p>While the others were going out into the garden for
coffee, Laura seized the opportunity and gave Herman a
kiss behind a door—a swift, fugitive, little kiss on the
cheek. But for Herman it was as if the doors of Paradise
had been suddenly flung open. He sat there mute amidst
the chatter and laughter, and revelled in the wonderful
thought that the girl in the silk frock, the beautiful Laura,
had kissed him.</p>

<p>And Laura also paused in drinking her coffee and munching
her sweets and remembered how his cheek had burnt
her lips. It really was rather pleasant to kiss. Neither
did it cost anything—possibly just the contrary....</p>

<p>They carefully avoided speaking to each other and they
could not for the world have looked each other in the eyes.</p>

<p>After this Stellan and Laura detached themselves more
and more from their brothers and sisters and came more
and more frequently to Herman’s house. They both felt
that the sombre and shabby Selambshof was not their
chosen field. No! Ekbacken was quite different—here
you escaped the sight of your father sitting about in his
dull fashion. From here intercourse with Stonehill and
Kolsnäs was easiest. Here, with their guardian, they had
the exciting and pleasurable feeling of being at the
heart of things. They felt already, those two fair heads,
that it was Ekbacken that was to be their stepping stone
to success in the world.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">BRUNDIN’S DOWNFALL</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">It had been a long autumn. With grey creeping mists
and ankle-deep slush, November had drawn a close
ring round Selambshof.</p>

<p>Peter was alone in the day time. As he had failed again
in his examination, he had had to leave school and it was
not yet decided what he was going to do. But time passed
quickly all the same, for recently he had lots of things
to attend to.</p>

<p>For example, the great pig-slaughter. Since six o’clock
this morning he had been strolling about in the dark yard
and as soon as dawn came he was down by the pig-sty
behind the cowshed.</p>

<p>The cowherd came trailing one poor pig after another.
Then they were raised on to the slaughter block and instantly
Anders, the stable man, stuck them in the neck so
that the blood spurted out. The bailiff was there himself,
and scratched the pigs’ backs with his stick and chatted in
friendly tones to them before execution. But old Kristin
was no longer there with the pail to collect the blood. As
long as she kept going, she had taken part in the slaughter
of the pigs. Silent and solemn she used to stand
there bent over her pail, stirring the blood as did the rest
of the tribe in days of old at the great winter sacrifice.
There was a strange emptiness after her. But the crows
were still here. Flocks of them settled in the high bare
lime tree and their croaking seemed like the voice of the
grey November day. Now and then they flew for a moment
down towards the steaming hot tripe as if to give a reminder
of their ancient rights.</p>

<p>I-i-i-i! squeaked a pig again, and the crows rose for a
moment as if from the pressure of the cry. But Peter
kept near the corner of the cowshed the whole time; he
came no nearer, and Brundin thought he was frightened:</p>

<p>“Come and help us. What kind of a country lad are
you to be frightened of the killing?”</p>

<p>But the bailiff was mistaken. Peter was not at all frightened
because the pigs were squeaking. He was only
afraid that they were squeaking for Brundin’s benefit and
not for his own and Selambshof’s. He stood anyhow sufficiently
near to hear what was called out at the weighing
machine, and if you looked carefully you could see that
his lips moved the whole time. He stood there counting
and muttering the figures in an undertone in order to
get them to stick in his memory. For Peter had really a
great deal in his memory. It was not the first time he had
stood aside like this and counted and measured. But then
he also knew to a nicety how much grain, potatoes, milk
and butter had been driven into town during the whole
autumn. What cunning, what tricks and pretences, what
long patient watches had not been necessary to keep count
of all this. No, Peter was not troubled for the pigs’ sakes.
There was good reason to look out for Peter the Watch-dog
nowadays. He no more looked as if he was afraid of a
beating. And he had become bigger of body and deeper
of voice.</p>

<p>Of course Peter was still afraid of Brundin. But his
terror no longer rose up like a mountain in front of him.
Brundin’s great and wonderful power had already been
dealt the first blow. That was when the mighty Brundin
had agreed without protest to Frida’s being dismissed.
Peter had brooded for days over this. And as he pondered
he observed that Brundin did not reach into the clouds.
And his great fear shrank up exquisitely into a little heap
of envy, anxiety and angry suspicion.</p>

<p>Peter did not go to his guardian, because it was he who
had placed Brundin in authority. Perhaps he was even
in league with the dangerous fellow. Imagine suspecting
old Hermansson! Ignorance is either very credulous or
very suspicious. In this case it was suspicious. And besides
Peter the Watch-dog was one of those who prefer
hunting alone.</p>

<p>The pig sticking was finished. The November day was
silent and grey as before.</p>

<p>Peter was still standing on his stone by the corner of
the cowshed. Round him the filth resembled a bog and
Brundin came splashing through it. He no longer looked
so good-tempered. His little fairy moustache curled contemptuously
at the rain, the mud, the smell of manure, and
the whole of the November atmosphere. He stopped just
in front of Peter, rocking on his heels and reflecting:</p>

<p>“Yes, Anders, get the dog-cart ready. I am going to
town after dinner after all.”</p>

<p>Peter started. Brundin going into town! Here was an
opportunity. He leaped after the bailiff through the mud.
Outside the bailiff’s quarters he even sidled up to the object
of his fear. And he was still like a great mountain
when you came near him—a high mountain with mocking
superior airs.</p>

<p>“I just wanted to come in and glance at the map for a
moment,” muttered Peter.</p>

<p>Brundin hummed a little tune and good-humouredly led
the boy into the office which lay to the right of the entrance
hall in the bailiff’s wing.</p>

<p>Now Peter was actually in the lion’s den. The yellow
cracked old plan of Selambshof hung over the sofa.
For a long while Peter was tremendously interested in it.
Then he began to glance round to right and left, and make
strange trampling movements to and fro like a bear on a
hot plate. Indeed he was not exactly beautiful to look at,
but deserved perhaps a certain admiration. As a matter
of fact he required a great deal of self-control to remain
in Brundin’s room.</p>

<p>Peter looked for the accounts books of the estate. From
outside he had often stolen a glance at them where they
were lying on the writing desk. But now they were not
there. They could not be anywhere else but in the big
brown cupboard between the windows.</p>

<p>The key was in the lock.</p>

<p>Peter sat down on the sofa and turned over the pages
of a price list. Brundin lit his pipe, looked over his
papers and did not seem to be in a hurry. Peter perspired
more and more.</p>

<p>At last the bailiff had to leave the room for a moment.
Instantly Peter jumped up and took the key out of the
cupboard. And he did more than that—he lifted off the
hooks of one window, both the inner and the outer—Then
another idea seized him: he took up another key
from amongst the rubbish on the writing desk and pushed
it into the keyhole of the cupboard so that nothing should
be noticed. He was no fool.</p>

<p>Now the cracked old dinner gong sounded and with his
booty in his damp hands, Peter stole out of the lion’s den.</p>

<p>After dinner came the first disappointment. The dog-cart
was never brought out, for Brundin received some
Saturday-guests and put off his journey to town until
Sunday. Peter had got to wait—a difficult task. He could
not stay at home. He felt so brittle and queer from the
strain that he scarcely dared to put his foot down on the
ground and still he had to go on walking and walking.
Now he had already reached town and once there he of
course made for the hay market. Shivering, and with a
queer trembling in the pit of his stomach he stood in the
Saturday crush, amidst sacks of potatoes and sides of
beef, staring at a big sign on a low yellow house with a
tiled roof:</p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c004">
    <div><span class="large">AXEL BRUNDIN &amp; CO.</span></div>
    <div class="c000">Cereals, grain, and vegetables.</div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c003">It was not the first time Peter had stood there spying.
He felt a need, as it were, to assure himself all the time
that the shop was still there. A fat old man usually
stood in the doorway with his thumbs stuck in the armholes
of his waistcoat. He was Brundin’s brother. He knew
him from the crayfish party. Most of the produce of Selambshof
went to him. And Peter had an intuition that
here lay the solution of some of the problems that worried
him.</p>

<p>Just fancy if only he could send in a policeman to take
a big bag of money from that fat old rascal! Slowly
Peter the Watch-dog sauntered homewards in the dark and
raw November night.</p>

<p>He awoke very early on Sunday morning. First he examined
the office window. Yes, the hooks were still unfastened.
Then he might just slip down to the outhouses
for a little. There had been frost during the night and
there were a few light snowflakes in the air. Peter crept
into the barn through a broken shutter. On the ground
floor the pig carcases gleamed with a pale light in the deep
twilight. He touched the hard cold fat. He felt how
the pigs hung helpless there. And once more he had
a frantic sense of his duty to defend them against Brundin.
He promised them that they had not died in vain.</p>

<p>Then Peter climbed to the next floor. Here the grain
lay about in big heaps on the floor. He sat down and
let the wheat run through his fingers. Usually it is pleasant
to sit in a granary and let the cool, round, fragrant
grains of corn run softly through the fingers. It makes
one think of summer and sunshine and the wide green fields.</p>

<p>But Peter, poor boy, had no such spacious feelings of
the prospective farmer. Everything had been spoilt for
him by Brundin. The gifts of the soil were poisoned for
him by a premature greedy anxiety.</p>

<p>At breakfast Peter was very silent. He did not fight
with his brothers and sisters, but of his own free will sat
down next to his father, even though it was not his turn.
Today was a great day and he tried to propitiate the Gods
by this sacrifice. You must neglect nothing if you would
succeed. He also stole to Church afterwards in order to
be quite on the safe side. Straight as a poker he sat there
trying to be really attentive, though of course he only
listened to his own thoughts. Peter had a long intimate
conversation with his God. And what kind of God had
Peter the Watch-dog? He was related to his sister Hedvig’s
God. Both had grown out of a common parentage. Old
Kristin’s servants’ God. Both had drawn their nourishment
from the terrors of those years of helplessness. But, whilst
Hedvig’s God had been reared on the fear of desire and
of sex, Peter’s God was from the first an economic potentate,
who severely punished torn clothes and broken money-boxes,
and he had gradually developed into a protector
of the rights of property with the more specific function
of making the bailiff of Selambshof smart. But Peter
was afraid that God might not have had time to consider
the matter properly and therefore he gave him in all humility
a number of delicate little hints as to the most suitable
way of dealing with Brundin.</p>

<p>Yes! such was Peter Selamb’s communion with God on
this day of great expectations—which, however, became a
day of disappointment.</p>

<p>At last evening came. The bailiff had already driven off
to town and the yard was in darkness. Then Peter crept
out in order to steal back Selambshof from Brundin.
If only he could get a glance at that armful of big blue
books all would be clear. His house-breaking was quite
successful, the windows opened, as did also the door of the
cupboard and in there he felt the books side by side.
With the precious burden in his arms Peter stole up the
dark stairs to the Observatory. He locked the door carefully,
lit a piece of candle and sank down trembling with
expectation at the table and began to examine the books.</p>

<p>And then he made a terrible discovery. He understood
nothing, absolutely nothing of this system of figures and
lines. “Debit,” “credit,” “carried forward,” etc., stood
there. What it all meant he could not make out. The
name Axel Brundin &amp; Co. he found everywhere in the
books. It stared out at him with ever-increasing mystery.
It was not at all the straightforward way that Peter had
imagined in connection with sacks of flour and barrels
of potatoes. He found nothing to hold fast to. At last
his head swam. He could not master Brundin’s row of
figures.</p>

<p>Peter struck his forehead against the table, cursing
and sobbing. This was a terrible defeat. Hopeless, miserable,
stiff with cold, he stole down from the icy Observatory
and put the books back in the cupboard without
having succeeded in stealing a single one of the bailiff’s
secrets.</p>

<p>That night chronicled a grievous relapse into the old
sense of impotence. Peter lay again in a besieged fortress.
And the Giant pursued him through a cycle of gruesome
dreams. Amongst other things the “Dreadful One”
ate six recently slaughtered pigs in a trice, whilst Frida
stood stark naked before him and stirred a pail containing
Peter’s blood.</p>

<p>But in spite of all this the old days were over. Peter
the Watch-dog began slowly to pluck up courage again.
As he brooded and brooded he realised at last that it was no
longer possible to hunt alone. And so it came about that
Peter too began to haunt Ekbacken. But he took very
good care not to run up against Stellan and Laura, whose
road lay in the same direction. He did not aim so high
as they. He had no desire to talk to his guardian. No,
Peter hovered about the old book-keeper, Lundbom. His
opportunity came in the evenings when the old man sat in
his own room smoking his pipe and drinking his hot whisky,
with his books in front of him. He questioned him patiently
and insistently until the old man felt touched by the
interest of this promising youth in double-entry Italian
book-keeping, and gave him proper instruction. Peter
literally sucked up the information. He was not difficult
to teach. Now he could calculate—he who had always
failed in his examinations in mathematics. With every
successful addition he added something to his power and
with every correct subtraction he subtracted something from
Brundin’s. Oh, what bliss it was to feel how his bugbear
was again shrinking and growing less each day.</p>

<p>During these efforts, Peter had not ceased his observations.
Now he knew what had been sent from the estate
during four whole months, prices and all. Then he repeated
his bold stroke one Saturday evening when the bailiff
went to town as usual to enjoy himself. But this time
he could decipher the mysterious writing. Oh! it was
an hour of feverish triumph up there in the Observatory.
Peter the Watch-dog found at once audacious frauds to
fasten his teeth into, amongst other things, Axel Brundin
who was only debited for 60 barrels of potatoes during
November and December. But Peter knew for certain that
the correct figure was 73. There he had a bite at the two
brothers’ hind legs.</p>

<p>Peter lay sleepless the whole night and fed his revenge
on Brundin.</p>

<p>Early on Sunday morning he stalked over to Ekbacken
and found his guardian in bed. Now he no longer shunned
the public gaze or beat about the bush. He went straight
to the point, was bold and insinuating. He cast the stolen
rye and potatoes straight in old Hermansson’s face. But
his guardian jumped up highly offended.</p>

<p>“What are you saying, boy? Remember that you are
talking of a person I have appointed. How did you get hold
of the books? What do you know about the yield of the
estate?”</p>

<p>But Peter was not to be intimidated. He came back time
after time with his rye and his potatoes. Gradually his
guardian began to soften.</p>

<p>“But it’s not possible,” he sighed dismally, “I am not
accustomed to people betraying my confidence in this way.
Very sad, really very sad, why did I ever undertake the
thankless task of becoming your guardian. Most sad and
unpleasant!”</p>

<p>After this he ordered his shaving water and began to
dress. Peter sat still with his armful of books and watched
his guardian. As soon as he was dressed he recovered his
dignity and his authority:</p>

<p>“I shall arrange for an investigation,” he said. “Go back
to your lessons now, my dear Peter. This is no matter for
children.”</p>

<p>No, there Uncle Hermansson was right. This was no
matter for children. That’s why he ought to have looked
after it better himself.</p>

<p>Peter sauntered home again entirely liberated from his
frightened sensation in the presence of grown-ups, and of
their authority and their ability.</p>

<p>After service old Hermansson came solemnly driving up
to Selambshof and conducted a great investigation in the
office in the absence of Brundin.</p>

<p>There was no end to the revelations now. Everyone had
something to say against the bailiff. As soon as the ice
was broken, accusations poured in against the culprit. They
almost fought to stick their knives into him in order to save
their own skins.</p>

<p>Evidently Selambshof had been systematically robbed for
years.</p>

<p>In the midst of all this, Brundin came driving back from
town in a state of mild intoxication. The old Fairy Prince
now cut a poor figure. He seemed quite nonplussed that
the old servants should have so completely forgotten his
gifts to them, his snuff, his gin, and his blind eye to their
own little peculations. For a moment he stiffened and made
an insolent effort to deny everything, but he failed miserably
in the face of Anders’ evidence. Anders had become
anxious about his carelessness in the matter of receipts, etc.,
and had himself written down all that he had driven into
town in order to protect himself.</p>

<p>Peter did not now stand aside as at the sticking of the
pigs. No, he stood in the midst of the crowd. Now he had
a voice in the matter. Sometimes he laughed suddenly, a
giggling, nervous laughter. The boy seemed suddenly to
have grown into something more like a man. When the
examination was over he suddenly looked quite disappointed.
For his part he would have liked to go on for
ever. The old servants left, however, and old Hermansson
went home to consult a lawyer. Brundin sat alone in the
office, ruminating. Then Peter thrust his face through the
door, grinning:</p>

<p>“You thief,” he cried. “You cursed thief.”</p>

<p>Oh, it was heavenly to spit at the cracked Colossus,
really to trample the old fear under foot.</p>

<p>No action was brought against Brundin. He himself
possessed nothing, but his brother was frightened into paying
a round sum corresponding to the proved losses of the
estate.</p>

<p>Then came the ignominious departure. He had been ill
for some days, but now he was off at last.</p>

<p>Peter did not show himself at first. But down under the
lime tree stood Hedvig. She had come straight home when
she heard of the scandal. There she stood pale and stiff
and motionless and watched Brundin’s furniture being
carried out. God only knows what she thought and felt.
Perhaps it was a feeling of dismal deliverance.</p>

<p>Now the sledge with its load of furniture slipped towards
the town crunching through the half-melted snow mixed
with sand—a bad surface for sledging. Brundin had not
even put his head outside the door but now he had to get
out. Crestfallen, grey, with downcast eyes, he came out
with a dining-room clock under his arm. Hedvig only
stared at him. His eyes met hers for a moment when he
was getting into the sledge. He bowed awkwardly and then
the spring of the clock made a noise as if it had been broken.
Hedvig did not bend her head, did not return his greeting.
She stood there like a graven image and there was
something of a rigid dark triumph in her expression.</p>

<p>But when Brundin disappeared down the avenue she
stole into his empty house and with a face suddenly grey
with the hunger of love she rubbed it against the empty
walls.</p>

<p>But Peter stood down at the corner of the avenue. He
had relapsed into his old habit of going somewhere alone
to meditate. He wondered how it was that Brundin was
not put into prison. Fancy if it was because old Hermansson
did not dare to bring Brundin into Court. What was
it Kristin used to say: “It’s a pity for those children
who have to have a guardian,” she used to say. Well,
Peter did not exactly believe that old Hermansson had
cheated them. But he had all the same a vague feeling
that the matter ought not to be forgotten.</p>

<p>The distrust we learn during the years when we have
a right to be trustful easily becomes a dangerous weapon.</p>

<p>It was now a little later in the spring. A new bailiff
of proved honesty had been appointed and Peter was sent
to an elementary Agricultural School in the Upland plain.</p>

<p>He did not like being there. The other pupils seemed
to him dull, the soil unfavourable. The Brundin case
was still fermenting within him. He longed to be home.
There are many kinds of homesickness, and one of them
is of a kind not suitable for poetry.</p>

<p>Let us now look at our friend Peter during the spring
ploughing. The pupils were standing in a bunch out on
the clay and each one had to plough a plot with the new
American steel plough.</p>

<p>“Press harder on the right guide. Not too shallow and
not too deep. Look at the horses. The furrows must be
straight as a die.”</p>

<p>Thus said the teacher. Peter was the last. He stood
there changing feet and thinking that he would take root
in the clay. At last it was his turn. He called to the
horses and the furrow was started. It was a still April
day with big white clouds in the sky. The horses’ sides
and the newly turned clay soil shone in the sun. Down
in a hollow hung a blue mist and further away a wood
of budding birches shimmered like a purple-brown cloud.
But Peter neither saw nor felt anything of all that. Nor
did he enjoy seeing how finely the ploughshare cut through
and turned up the frozen soil. He had no desire just
to add furrow to furrow in the ploughed field. He only
thought it was heavy, tiresome, lost labour. And all
the same he looked like a peasant with his coarse features
and his heavy awkward carriage, which he had probably
inherited from his mother’s side. But a poison had entered
into the peasant’s body. It was the infection of the
town—the town that had begun to creep nearer and nearer
Selambshof. It was anxiety to turn everything into money.
If only he were back at Selambshof, he thought. But he
did not long for the house or the trees. He longed to
sneak about, and spy and struggle for possession of the
money that he already scented. To go about here ploughing
soil that was not even his own made him sick. He
had already developed the habit of looking at everything
from the point of view of ownership. You cannot take
any interest in a thing for itself. No, nothing exists in
itself but only as “mine” or “yours,” principally “mine.”
To whom did this field belong? To the County? That
is the same thing as nobody. That was empty, strange,
and simply repellent, thought Peter. He had already begun
to fear common interests and common institutions.
They constituted a kind of silent affront to his selfishness.</p>

<p>Then Peter came slowly back on the return and moved
alongside his first furrow. It did not look very straight.
He was reproved by his instructor—he heard the mumbling
and suppressed laughter of his fellow students.
What stupid country bumpkins they were with their lazy
self-confidence. Their rustic self-importance about spray-drains
and dung-wells irritated him. What experience of
life had they had? It would do them good to get caught
in the snares of somebody like Brundin and to be really,
thoroughly cheated for once. And then he began to think
of that old story again. There was something strangely
fascinating in thinking of Brundin’s tricks and wheezes.
Of course he disapproved of it all. But he could not
help thinking of it, all the same. “So that is what they
call business,” thought Peter. “That is the way to get
rich.” He felt a strange disquietude, one moment he was
hot and the next cold. “I shall never allow anybody to
cheat me,” he thought. “But how can you really make
sure? The only way is, of course, to go to meet one’s
enemy and forestall him. You must practise deception,
not much, of course, but sufficient to prevent him from
deceiving you.”</p>

<p>Peter had now done his allotted share of the ploughing.
He stopped the horses and wiped his brow.</p>

<p>“You are not ploughing deep enough, or straight enough.
This is not a surface-plough. You ought to get down
to the subsoil all the way. What sort of a growth do you
expect to get here?”</p>

<p>“I don’t care a damn,” thought Peter.</p>

<p>Then the Farm gong sounded and they moved homewards
along the wet road. Peter jogged beside the horses
with half-closed eyes. He was dreaming of Selambshof in
figures. He had seen them,—when he pried into the books
of the estate. There were rents for land and houses, for
fishing rights, and quarries, for cartage and for the produce
of the estate. Enormous sums in his eyes. “I shall
control all that money,” he thought. “I shall be bailiff,
and I shall have my reward, because I saved the estate
from Brundin. No, don’t imagine that I can be kept out
of all that.”</p>

<p>Peter breathed heavily. He felt a queer sucking sensation
in his stomach. Fancy if it should all be his. Fancy
if one day he should become rich, rich! No, he no longer
had only fear and worries—certain timid, trembling voluptuous
desires contracted his throat.</p>

<p>Is it then to be wondered at that Peter Selamb did not
plough deep enough in the alien and unsympathetic Upland
clay?</p>

<p><i>These were the days of his betrothal to wealth.</i></p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VIII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">SEPTEMBER SPRING</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Laura lay awake the whole night reading a novel,
and at breakfast she only played with her food.
Then she stole out into the pantry and took her usual
draught of vinegar.</p>

<p>It was a day in the late summer, warm and still. Down
the slope the August pears were tempting, the hammock
and the lazy lapping of the water against the shutters of
the bathing box were also a standing temptation. But
Laura resisted them. For a whole fortnight she had struggled
to get rid of her sunburn and to become pale and
thin. Slowly she went back to her room and tried to
think at each step that she was rather weak and feeble.</p>

<p>Laura’s room was small and shady. It lay on the
ground floor overlooking the avenue. She walked up to
the mirror and scrutinized herself carefully from head to
foot. She was no longer a plump little bright-eyed imp
with plaits of fair hair dangling behind, and fat legs.
No, it was a pale, interesting-looking young lady who
stood there with a curled fringe, neat waist and a tired
and dreamy look in her eyes.</p>

<p>When Laura had gazed at herself for a long while, with
mixed feelings of complete approval and vague pity, she
stole to the window and sat down very carefully as if she
had been made of some very brittle material. It was a
narrow and rather dismal window in the thick walls of
Selambshof. A spray of the sparse and dying vine on the
north side of the house flapped against the window-sill.
It bore a small bunch of grapes, green and no bigger
than pin-heads. What sweet doll’s grapes they are, she
thought suddenly, and she had a vision of a doll’s party
in the nursery with grapes for dessert, but she punished
herself immediately for this childishness. She had indeed
other things to think of. Piously she laid her hands
one over the other and settled down comfortably in the
chair and with her newfound refinement of melancholy,
she dreamed that she was in very weak health and very
sad—a really seductive little dream!</p>

<p>Then Herman came walking towards the house, straight,
smart, and correct. He was wearing a student’s cap, for
by dint of hard work and an ambitious spirit he had come
so far. And in spite of the heat he did not wear it tipped
back, but on top of his head as if it were a part of the
uniform of manhood and knowledge. And he did not
look around him so nervously under an affected unconcern.
No, now he looked just a little haughty as he came
straight up to Laura’s window, climbed up on the seat and
shook hands with her.</p>

<p>“Why do you never come to Ekbacken nowadays? It’s
a fortnight since you were there.”</p>

<p>Laura half-closed her eyes and smiled a wan smile.
Her hand dropped out of his and lay like a tired little
bird on the window-sill:</p>

<p>“My dear Herman, we have been there too much already.”</p>

<p>“What nonsense!”</p>

<p>Laura was vexed at his clumsiness in not noticing her
haggard appearance:</p>

<p>“Besides, I don’t feel very well, you know, Herman.”</p>

<p>That was too much, even for Herman. He could not
help laughing.</p>

<p>“You ill, Laura! don’t talk such rubbish!”</p>

<p>What unfeeling, hard-hearted laughter. After all her
efforts. At that moment she thoroughly detested him.
But she did not answer sharply, she only looked deeply
grieved and pained:</p>

<p>“Good-bye,” she murmured, “I am too tired to talk to
you any longer. I must lie down for a while.”</p>

<p>Thereupon she closed the window in Herman’s face and
pulled down the blind. Then she lay down on her bed
and thought how unseeing and cold-hearted people were.
Did they want to make her drink more vinegar? Well
she was not frightened, although she had heard that it
might make her really ill.</p>

<p>For another week Laura continued the darkness and
vinegar treatment and then walked resolutely down to old
Hermansson.</p>

<p>At Ekbacken the saws were humming as smoothly as
ever in the red shed. The sailors were still there caulking
the old smacks and old Lundbom was still casting up not
unfavourable balances. Nothing had changed at Ekbacken
except that it had grown a little older and more peaceful.
But now and then a certain ill-disposed rival would rub
his hands and think that Ekbacken would prove too good
for this world.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson was not in the office. He did not often
appear there nowadays. He sat in his dressing gown and
smoking cap in the big easy chair in the drawing room,
reading a newspaper that he held far from his eyes as if
not to come into close contact with the restlessness and
misery of the world.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson had aged considerably of late. He
was almost always poorly now. But he did not complain.
He protested with more and more marked dignity against
his weakness. Unconsciously the Brundin case had dealt
a nasty blow to his assurance and comfort. In consequence,
his tone had become more self-satisfied and domineering
than ever. The old man was really quite tender-hearted
beneath his hard exterior and Stellan and Laura
had at once perceived this, with the cruel insight of youth.
They did not hesitate to exploit their guardian’s weakness
for their own comfort.</p>

<p>Laura said “Good-morning,” and sank with a sigh into
a chair, and looked worse than ever.</p>

<p>“What’s the matter with you, dear child? At your age
one should not go about looking ill. Look at me, I shall
soon be seventy and I am as well as ever.”</p>

<p>And saying this, he relapsed into the soft upholstery
of his chair, his face twitching from rheumatism. But
this had no effect on Laura:</p>

<p>“I can’t help it, I cough and have no appetite. I think
I need a change of air.”</p>

<p>“Change of air! When do you think I have ever had
a change of air in my life? And yet I have never been
ill more than three days together in all my life!”</p>

<p>“Everybody can’t be as well as you, Uncle. And I am
only a girl. Oh! if only Mother were alive so that I
might have somebody to talk to.”</p>

<p>Laura’s voice trembled and the tears were already in
her eyes. Her guardian grew alarmed:</p>

<p>“What’s the matter? What do you want to do, then,
my dear child?”</p>

<p>Then Laura could restrain her desire no longer:</p>

<p>“I ... I want to go to a boarding school ... in
Switzerland. You get such an appetite there. It would
do my chest good. Elvira Lähnfeldt at Trefvinge is going
to Neuchatel. Stellan told me so, for he was invited.
Neuchatel is said to be so very suitable. And fancy to
be able to talk French properly—and then the air,—”</p>

<p>Old Hermansson’s horizon did not stretch beyond the
frontiers of his own country. He was dumbfounded by
the audacity of the proposal:</p>

<p>“Impossible, my dear child, impossible!”</p>

<p>After the first attack Laura collected her forces for a
more systematic siege:</p>

<p>“Oh, Uncle, you should live at Selambshof,” she wailed.
“You would be ill in a week. Yes, it is so unpleasant at
home since that dreadful business with Brundin.”</p>

<p>Laura glanced at her guardian; she seemed satisfied with
the effect and continued:</p>

<p>“It is worst with Peter. He curses like a farm labourer
and he swears at table. He is really no company for a
young girl!”</p>

<p>That also had a good effect. Old Hermansson could
not bear Peter since he had exposed Brundin. Laura already
knew so much about the human heart. The old
man nodded pensively:</p>

<p>“I admit that your brother Peter is not all that he
ought to be. But if it is not always pleasant at home, you
know that you are always welcome at Ekbacken.”</p>

<p>“Thank you. You are so awfully kind, both you and
Herman. But ...” (Laura flushed beneath her self-induced
pallor and glanced archly at her guardian) “but ...
it looks strange for me to be always here. I don’t know
if it is right any longer and then I thought that both you
and Herman would like me to have some sort of education.”</p>

<p>Here she was interrupted by an attack of coughing, and
she put her hand to her chest with an anxious and sudden
air of distraction.</p>

<p>Her guardian looked very perplexed. As a matter of
fact he looked upon the affection of the young pair for
each other with some pleasure. He himself had originally
been a poor clerk who had risen to his present position
by marrying the daughter of his employer. To him Selambshof
and the Selambs still seemed an old distinguished
place and family. Yes! secretly he was even
flattered by Laura’s walks with Herman. The thought of
his future daughter-in-law being in a Swiss boarding school
like the young lady at Trefvinge was also pleasant. So
he slowly assumed an expression which was more of anxiety
than of opposition.</p>

<p>“Well, my dear child, we must think it over.”</p>

<p>Laura had to control herself not to dance for joy so
long as she was within sight of Ekbacken. But when she
reached home she ate for the first time for a whole month
till she was satisfied.</p>

<p>The following weeks were for Laura a time of glowing
expectation, blissful faithlessness, touching farewells and
a feeling almost approaching love.</p>

<p>On one of the first days of September, when the air had
all the coolness and clearness of autumn, she and Herman
were walking through the garden of Selambshof.
The garden was situated on the southern slope, between
the avenue and the lake, screened by a row of tall ash
trees from the dismal, brooding, heaviness of the house.
It was much neglected but it was a pleasant sort of neglect
and this was after all a little corner of Selambshof where
something of an idyll still lingered.</p>

<p>Laura and Herman were strolling slowly along the wet,
half choked paths between currant bushes smothered in
weeds and scraggy old apple trees covered with grey moss
which still as if by a miracle bore beautiful shining apples.
Here a tumbled-down fence lay with an appearance
of infinite fatigue, and there the pestweed had pushed up
into the light out of a half smothered ditch, and with its
dense growth of enormous leaves had vanquished a row
of raspberry bushes, where dry branches stretched up
helplessly out of the green sea. Then there was a row
of frames with broken glass and a bed of cabbages looking
quite blue in the shade. Then came the long beds with
a few asters and dahlias in front of the gardener’s dilapidated
old cottage.</p>

<p>“It is very beautiful here,” whispered Laura. There was
a note of surprise in her voice. It had evidently never
occurred to her that it might be beautiful here. She glanced
sideways at Herman who looked at once shy and hurt.</p>

<p>“If it is beautiful here why are you going away?”</p>

<p>The sun was not less bright because Herman turned away
from her and grumbled. Laura pressed his hand encouragingly:</p>

<p>“I’ll soon be back,” she whispered softly.</p>

<p>She felt very superior to Selambshof and Herman and
all the other everyday things which remained where they
were put and never moved. But all the same there was a
strange tenderness in her feeling of superiority. Sometimes
she did not quite know if it was gay or sad.</p>

<p>Old Johannes, the gardener, sat in his porch and looked
tranquilly at the neglect around him. He had been a
sailor in his youth and divided his day into watches, four
hours he smoked his pipe and four hours he rested. But
during the day watch he slept. But somehow he managed
to pay his rent so that he was not driven out. Until today
Laura had only thought of the old man as something unkempt
and dirty. She had never given him a further
thought as she munched his apples. But now he suddenly
appeared quite nice to her, sitting there in the sunshine.
A bumble bee buzzed lazily round the patches on his trouser-knees.
His hands seemed as if made of bark. His whole
face was smothered with hair, just as the garden was with
weeds. When he scratched his beard with his coarse nail
there was a grating sound. But his eyes were wonderfully
calm. It was as if in a quiet, still, protected corner the
sun were shining down on a barrel of rainwater.</p>

<p>Laura suddenly realised why Tord spent so much time
with the gardener.</p>

<p>“How is Tord’s fox?” she wondered.</p>

<p>She referred to a fox that had been caught in a trap and
which Tord had been allowed to keep. It lived in a shed.</p>

<p>“Tord has got him on the leash,” smiled the old fellow,
pleased at the interest in their common pet.</p>

<p>The door of a big grateless room stood open. The floor
was covered with fruit. Laura dived in with the gardener
and came out with her hat filled with the rosiest apples that
ever woman tempted man with. Herman sighed and ate.
It was all “sour grapes” to him. He pulled at Laura’s arm.
He wanted to be alone with her. He was jealous of the
garden, of the gardener, of the Swiss Alps, and of everything.</p>

<p>They moved on.</p>

<p>On the other side there was a hillock with terraces and
ledges and some tumbled-down summer cottages. Here
everything was silent, mysterious, and abandoned. Laura
and Herman walked about in the small devastated gardens
and peeped into the empty rooms where the winter seemed
already to have thrown its shadow. Squeezed in between
the lake and the hill lay a rambling old house given over to
the rooks. It was a high house with three balconies, built
over the water and embellished with some extraordinary
extensions on the land side. Here the water splashed
against the piles, covered with a green ooze, and the aspens,
burnt red by the autumn, rustled, and the whole was illuminated
by a strange light reflected from the paths covered
with yellow leaves.</p>

<p>Herman succeeded in opening the door. Past empty
cupboards, garden furniture and old gate-legged tables
covered with marks left by glasses they penetrated to the
highest balcony. Here the last flies of autumn buzzed
against the window panes and tendrils of Virginia Creeper
pushed in through the chinks and cracks.</p>

<p>They sank down on a garden seat strangely moved by this
sunny brightness and forlorn melancholy. Herman dug
his stick into the floor-boards and then he suddenly threw it
aside and kissed her. He kissed her passionately and
violently with bitter sealed lips. But she pulled him
towards her and opened her lips softly. And she loved to
feel how he tried to resist her but was not able to do so.
No, humbly and helplessly he clung to her lips. This was
their first real kiss. Everything before had been play.
And she was going to leave all this behind. She felt so
tenderly, so blissfully, so lovingly faithless. The tears came
into her eyes and she smiled like a real little angel.</p>

<p>At this moment Laura happened to look out through one
of the side windows. Who was that standing far away on
the hill, almost on the same level as they were, if not Hedvig.
She pretended to be interested in something out on the
lake. But the expression of offended loneliness and stern
disapproval in her pinched face was not to be mistaken.
She had a disagreeable way of stealing upon you, had
Hedvig. Of course she had seen everything. Of course
she was green with envy because Laura had caught Herman
and was going to Switzerland and was not as silly as
Hedvig herself.</p>

<p>“So now we shall have her haunting this place,” muttered
Laura. “Now this jolly place is spoilt for us.”</p>

<p>They pulled an old curtain before the window so that
Hedvig should see nothing and then they stole away from
“The Rookery” as silently as Indians. Now they were out
in the wood on the other side of the avenue and they kissed
each other again, but without lingering. A restless longing
drove them on. They walked all the way to Träskängen
and when they got there it was almost evening. A cold
breeze met them as they jumped about from one dry spot
to another.</p>

<p>In the deepest hollow there lay a white mist over banks
of reeds and pools. But when they came up again on the
other side of the hill towards the quarries it was so hot
that they had to stop. In the twilight the scene around
them seemed ragged and gloomy and deserted.</p>

<p>It was old Enoch who had started blasting here once
upon a time. It seemed as if an evil spirit had ruled the
forest, or some barren destructive fiend. Everywhere
there were ravines, caves, treacherous holes and screes of
clattering stones and loose boulders ready to slip away beneath
your feet, and everything was enveloped in an almost
impenetrable growth of young golden aspen.</p>

<p>And then the autumn moon rose above the forest in the
west.</p>

<p>“It really is wonderfully fine,” whispered Herman, fascinated
by the romance of this desolate wilderness.</p>

<p>“Yes, it is almost like the Alps,” answered Laura, and
groped for him that she might feel him tremble with
jealous love. But as soon as she had said it she trembled
herself. Yes, she was playing a dangerous game up there
among the rough boulders of Old Hök’s overgrown stony
wilderness. Laura suddenly felt love clutching her heart
with burning fingers. For a moment she gave herself up to
this new and painful sensation, but then she became frightened,
with the violent fear of a threatened egoism. She
jumped up and pushed him away from her:</p>

<p>“No, now I must go home.”</p>

<p>But Herman insisted:</p>

<p>“No, we must go up to Enoch’s gorge,” he panted. “It
is haunted, and up to the old quarrymen’s shed.”</p>

<p>His voice had never sounded so near her, so strangely
near. She followed him against her will.</p>

<p>Enoch’s gorge was a perpendicular precipitous gully,
blasted out of the rock. They held each others’ hands and
crept up to the edge with their heads swimming. It was
dark down below. Fancy if he pulls me down! the thought
flashed through Laura’s head, and she suddenly tore her
hand out of his.</p>

<p>Then they came to the shed. There were stones in front
of the door, but Herman rolled them away. Inside something
lay on a couple of overturned empty boxes. In the
light of a match they saw a few books, a heap of strange
stones, shells and horses’ teeth, a dried-up lizard and a
broken bottle with fish spawn, by the side of a half-eaten
piece of bread and butter.</p>

<p>Then somebody stood in the doorway. It was Tord.
He looked unusually tall in the twilight. In spite of his
sixteen years he was dressed in breeches and an outgrown
sailor blouse, his long wrists sticking out from the sleeves.
He stood quite still and stared at the invaders with an expression
of fear and anger. And between his legs the fox
thrust out his pointed nose and his bright eyes and sniffed.
He had only three legs, poor thing, the fourth had been
caught in the trap.</p>

<p>“What are you doing here?” growled Tord at last in a
thick voice.</p>

<p>Herman and Laura were embarrassed to have been taken
unawares and in their haste resorted to jeers.</p>

<p>Laura pushed some beetles on to Tord’s bread and butter.</p>

<p>“Here you are! a beetle sandwich!”</p>

<p>Tord turned pale. This was his refuge, his peaceful retreat.
Here he had all his trophies from Träskängen, his
lonely and glorious hunting ground for frog spawn, lizards,
divers, birds’ eggs and bats—and now his poor secrets were
captured by intruders. He stood there swinging his long
bare arms. He gave one the impression of a dumb captive
creature like the fox beside him. It was as if he could only
express his feelings by a shriek. But now he clenched his
fist and his face twitched with sudden and violent anger.</p>

<p>“Go away,” he cried. “Get away. This is my place.”</p>

<p>“All right, we are going.”</p>

<p>Laura dragged Herman with her. In the bushes beside
them they heard the flop of a stone that Tord had cast after
them. And then he called out something coarse after them,
one of those impossible, foul expressions of impotent boyhood.
Herman wanted to rush back and thrash him, but
Laura stamped her foot on the ground and commanded him
to take her home at once. She was suddenly short, cold,
and offended, just as if Herman had injured her.</p>

<p>“You are silly,” she snapped. “What business had we
up in that stupid quarry? Tell me what business we had
there!”</p>

<p>In reality Laura was not in the least angry. She was
afraid, and she sought relief for her fear in scolding him.
Love had touched the egoism of her heart with a burning
finger, and she felt restless in the twilight. That was the
reason why she was so anxious to get home.</p>

<p>Poor Herman got no benefit from his kiss that evening.
And there were no more kisses before her departure. Laura
had suddenly grown careful, prim and full of moral qualms.
Only at the very last, when her ticket was bought and the
retreat clear did she recover some of her old amiability
and mischief, and deigned graciously to cajole his heart out
of his breast so as to have something to show to the other
schoolgirls.</p>

<p>Now she was already standing on the step of the railway
carriage with Elvira Lähnfeldt and Manne and his mother
who were also travelling south. Cheerfully and with
perfect ease she chatted to everybody. She was radiantly
happy and her happiness made her beautiful. How could
she be so happy when Herman was standing there with a
void in his breast?</p>

<p>The train started. Her handkerchief was lost in the enveloping
white steam.</p>

<p>On the way back to Ekbacken, Herman instinctively
joined Stellan. With him the air seemed less oppressive
and it seemed that something of Laura remained after all.</p>

<p>Stellan had not been very often at Ekbacken lately.
And if he came it was to scold Laura, who was always there.
Sisters are a doubtful blessing when they begin to take
your friends away from you.</p>

<p>No, nowadays, Stellan went mostly to Manne at Kolsnäs.
He had nobody else to turn to, because Percy was away in
Jämtland for the summer on account of his chest. And
Stonehill had been sold. Lake Mälare was beginning to
be unfashionable and nice people moved out to sea.
And then the town was creeping nearer, and it seemed to
make the whole landscape look poor and ugly. They were
already laying the foundation of a factory close to Stonehill.
In those few years the fine place had already begun
to look insignificant and neglected. Stellan avoided looking
that way when he rowed over to Manne. He had to think of
the footman and the horses at Kolsnäs in order not to feel
sick of the old lake.</p>

<p>Manne had had a horse given to him in the spring, when
he had at last succeeded in squeezing through his matriculation
examination. The whole summer had been
spent in wild riding. Every second day Manne lent Stellan
his black horse, “Sultan,” for Manne was always a good
friend. He had a kind, open smile and blue, somewhat
misty eyes. He had already begun to lose the hair on the
top of his head, but that did not prevent him from looking
as boyish as ever. Nobody could look so splendidly unaware
of the fact that necks can be broken. But his wild
careering about was not restlessness. He did not worry
about what he was going to be. That was quite superfluous,
for his future was written on his face and the shape of his
legs. He was a born Cavalry officer!</p>

<p>For Stellan the matter was not quite so simple—he was
poor and besides, confound it, he had brains.</p>

<p>Anyhow, he enlarged his horizon. In company with
Manne he sometimes rode across to Trefvinge, the great
and magnificent Trefvinge. Stellan had always a strange
cold sensation, a mixture of voluptuous ease and of hatred
when his horse carried him across the grand stretch of
gravel in front of its great white façade. Trefvinge was a
real castle, a famous, historic castle of the seventeenth century.
It impressed everybody against their wills, except
the owner, Count Lähnfeldt, who had not been born a count.
The lord of the castle himself scarcely ever appeared, but
Elvira rode out with them. She was a slender girl with a
shrill commanding voice, especially when she was excited.
There was nothing shy about her and she had no particularly
girlish manners, so she did not spoil sport. None of the
young men were in love with her. Stellan used to tease
her in a way that was sometimes cold and biting. It was as
if he wanted to take his revenge because the castle in which
she lived was so shockingly big and aristocratic.</p>

<p>In this way, then, the summer passed, and then Manne
got the silly idea of going to Germany with his mother.
That Elvira and Laura should go, of course, made no
difference to Stellan, but Manne! That was a blow—because
of “Sultan.”</p>

<p>Stellan had nothing but Herman and the sailing boat to
fall back upon. And so after all the wild riding began
sailing just as wild. Stellan could not remain still. In
the autumn he felt that the cessation of the constraint of
school had left a certain emptiness and restlessness. The
future worried him.</p>

<p>Herman was with him in the boat. His future was Laura.
He had thought of going to an English shipbuilding school
in the autumn. But he could not make up his mind. He
was caught in the memory of their kisses. He clung to
Stellan, her brother. Yes, it was only for Stellan’s sake he
took part in those chilly autumn sailing trips. He sat there
huddled up in the spray and hugged Laura’s solitary little
letter in his pocket and hoped that her brother would talk
of her.</p>

<p>Stellan saw very well that Herman was not living in the
same world as himself and that irritated him. He shrugged
his shoulders with a contemptuous pity which perhaps at
bottom was nothing more than the secret envy of the poor.
He smiled grim little smiles when he saw Herman’s eyes
directed towards him with the same expression of supplication.
He pressed the helm and conspired with the autumn,
the wind and the lake against this obstinate love. He was
happiest when Herman was fully occupied in bailing
out the water.</p>

<p>Herman sat by the fore-sheet, and slackened and made
fast. Now and then he looked astern at Stellan. There
was a mixture of admiration, anxiety and something akin to
secret pity in his look. Stellan wore the same expression
now as at school when things were at their hottest—bold, independent,
and scoffing. Oh! how Herman had envied him
that he never allowed himself to be impressed by his teachers,
that, in spite of his laziness, he always knew how
to answer. Ugh! the water dashed in from the lee! But
Stellan never condescended to luff up. It was almost terrible
to see how indifferent he was. He was quite capable
of sinking them. Herman was not afraid for himself.
But he felt a pang in his heart. Was there not something
strangely forlorn about Stellan. Did he not sit there alone
with the wind and the grey lake. It seemed as if poor
Stellan had been locked out from something. And he did
not even know that he could knock at the door.</p>

<p>These were Herman’s thoughts as he clung wet and
cold to the weather gunwale and received the worst spray
over his back. For he had a little letter in his pocket
to hug furtively.</p>

<p>One day something happened. But this time Herman
sat at the helm and not Stellan.</p>

<p>There was a dash of fitful April weather at the beginning
of October. The hot sun shone between big clouds and
below were black squalls. It was not rough, but there
came treacherous gusts of wind by the dips of the land.
And into the bargain it was Saturday.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson’s trim little “Ellida” lay for the moment
to lee as on a mirror. The sails hung slack, the boat lay
over to windward and the sun was deliciously warm.
Slowly they overhauled an absurd little overrigged boat, a
real caricature of a boat. It was painted white, and on
the stern was painted “Kalla,” in big black letters.
Aboard were three workingmen from the new factory
under construction. Their half-drunk bass voices rolled
out over the water. One of them stood with his foot
on the gunwale, gripping the stays with one hand and
flourishing a bottle in the other. Never had the sun shone
on such recklessness.</p>

<p>Stellan’s eyes flashed:</p>

<p>“This will be interesting,” he muttered.</p>

<p>“Ellida” was now in the shadow of a racing cloud.
They stared back at the man with the bottle. They had
a sudden horrid sensation of cold in the pit of the stomach.
Heigh Ho! Then the dark squall came sweeping along.
It first struck the small boat. She instantly went round
as if by a single turn of the hand of Fate. The three
workingmen had not even time to utter a curse before
they were in the water and the boat had sunk.</p>

<p>On the “Ellida” as I have said before, Herman sat at
the tiller. Not for a moment did he think of their own
danger. He only wanted to rush to help the drowning
men. But in his flurry he put the tiller over to windward
instead of to leeward. And in an instant the “Ellida” had
the same fate. The whole thing had not taken more than
five seconds.</p>

<p>The water was ice cold. The boat disappeared quickly
under them. Herman saw Stellan appear beside him.
He did not say anything, but began to swim towards land.
Herman followed. It was a fair distance, but at last they
crawled up amongst the boulders along the shore, stiff
and tired out.</p>

<p>“How idiotic,” gasped Stellan. “You don’t sail a boat
to capsize it!”</p>

<p>But Herman stared, as if suddenly turned to stone, across
the lake. It was empty and silent. The water shone green
again, with little white crests, in the sun. Only a
few floating bulkheads and oars bore witness to the catastrophe.
Ashore nobody seemed to have noticed anything.</p>

<p>Herman ran out into the water again up to his waist:</p>

<p>“Help!” he cried, “Help! They are drowning! Help!”</p>

<p>The echo came back from the nearest cliff: “Help!
Help!”</p>

<p>Stellan pulled him by the arm:</p>

<p>“There is no use calling. They are where they are.
Now let us run home!”</p>

<p>“Drowned! All three. It’s dreadful,” moaned Herman.</p>

<p>Then they began to run. At the corner of the avenue
where they must separate to reach their respective homes,
Stellan caught hold of his friend’s arm again. There
were blue and yellow streaks on his face from the soaked
lining of his cap, but his expression was both tense and
elated:</p>

<p>“Don’t forget that we capsized in trying to rescue them,”
he muttered. “It looks beastly bad otherwise.”</p>

<p>That same evening they were sitting out on the long
landing stage by the yard. It was quite calm now. The
atmosphere twinkled coldly between the black fleets of
cloud. Over the oak trees out on the spit of land the
lights of Stockholm lit the sky. There is always something
both of exhortation and menace in the pale radiance in
the sky over an invisible city. Now the crescent moon
peeped out over the serried edge of the forest behind
Stonehill and threw a few shafts of light over the dark
water—the dark water holding the three dead.</p>

<p>Herman was talking of the accident. He could not
let the subject drop. He returned time after time to certain
points, in order to prove that they could have done absolutely
nothing to save the drowning men. There was
a note of supplication in his voice as if nevertheless he
felt remorse. He also shivered secretly. The world
seemed to him gruesome—gruesome but still blessed, because
Laura was in it. Her smile was there and so were
the cold stars, over the black water. He was sitting beside
her brother. Again Herman felt that burning desire
to talk of her. But he did not dare, there was something
in Stellan’s tone that kept him back, that made him vaguely
uneasy. And he was too young too, thought Herman, to
understand how different people can be.</p>

<p>Stellan walked up and down the landing stage. He
talked in short, jerky sentences about sailing and riding
and sport. He seemed strangely excited. He was one of
those who are stimulated by the icy blasts of life. It
was as if the dead out there helped him to come to a
decision. With complete detachment from all this talk
he suddenly came to reflect coolly, clearly and swiftly
on his own future. Life is short and uncertain, he
thought. Life is a gamble. It is silly to take it too
seriously. I shall be an officer. I shall have a smart
uniform. I shall spend my time amidst arms, horses and
smart people. I want to be on top. I shall have excitement,
adventures, be in danger, and perhaps go to war.
But the money? It is expensive to be an officer. Well,
there will always be a way out. I suppose I shall have
to use Laura as a lure. Poor Herman has surrendered unconditionally.
I can get him to do what I like. He
just goes about begging me to trample on him for Laura’s
sake. He will do the hard work for me with the old man.
Anyhow he can’t say “no” to anything, poor old fellow.
I’ll be an officer all right if I play my cards properly.</p>

<p>Thus it happened that Stellan Selamb found his guiding
star one autumn evening. It was a bright, frosty star twinkling
keenly over there in the pale light halo over the
town, the town that lay thus waiting on the confines of
his childhood’s kingdom, the town with the cross lightning
of fate and a merciless consuming fire.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>That same evening Laura stood with a bag of sweets
in her hand and looked out through a small half-opened
ground glass window. She was, with due respect, in the
smallest room in the school, a room with a bolt on the
inside. She had withdrawn there in order to eat her
sweets in peace. If you were to share with all the other
girls there would be nothing left for yourself.</p>

<p>Whilst Laura munched sweets her glance strayed up
the sloping expanse of roofs and treetops of the town
and out over the calm Neuchatel Lake, which seemed to
her as large as a sea, and on to the towering Alps in the
distance, whose snow covered tops soared out of the shadow
and silence into the light of a crescent moon of the palest
silver.</p>

<p>Laura stared, ate, and dreamed. How perfectly lovely,
she thought. And she was right. Not even a poster
could be more beautiful.</p>

<p>What was Laura dreaming about now in the glow of
this eternal snow? Not about silence, the infinite withdrawal
from the world, oh no! Laura was dreaming about
a long honeymoon, a long, long honeymoon. She was
walking on wonderfully soft hotel carpets, she was eating
seven course dinners in luxurious dining-rooms, she was
furtively kissing in dark rumbling tunnels, she was saved
by strong arms on the edge of dizzy precipices. And
it was of course Herman who kissed her in the tunnels, and
saved her with his strong arms. Of course it was Herman.
She never thought of anybody else. It was not at all
disagreeable to dream of a long wedding trip with Herman.</p>

<p>But of a home with him she did not dream.</p>

<p>The bag was suddenly empty, and her throat was burning
after all the strong-flavoured sweets she had eaten. Laura
had to run down and drink a whole bottle of water and
somehow she did not write any letters as she had intended.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">IX<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">PETER THE BOSS</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Already at the Agricultural school a strange change
had begun in Peter Selamb. And it became still
more pronounced on his return home. He somehow
became more positive. He realised that one cannot go on
for ever merely watching and spying on others. It is
better to be the object of attention.</p>

<p>Peter wanted to be bailiff at Selambshof and for that
reason he tried to get friends and supporters. Was the
spying and grumbling Peter the Watch-dog endeavouring
to secure friends like a politician before an election? Was
he not doomed to failure? No, because Peter was no
longer the same after his victory over Brundin. Fear had
thrown a spell upon him. It had made him ugly and
repulsive. But now he had somehow broken the enchantment.
To the naked eye he seemed almost human. From
fear he had passed quite readily to lying, a not uncommon
step. Fear is the parent of a real and deliberate
mendacity and somehow it persists under the smiling exterior.
As yet Peter did not lie consciously. Alas! the
conscious lie is so slight, so harmless, so transparent.
No, give me the real, thorough, unconscious lie, especially
if it is joined with that particular greed that so often grows
up from the deep root of fear. Then we may expect
consequences.</p>

<p>As Peter changed, the people round about him also
began to change. They were no longer dangerous and
malevolent people before whom he had to be on his guard
every moment. He began to see them in the light of his
desires, and that is also a light of its kind. He found to
his surprise that these people, formerly so unreliable, not
unwillingly allowed themselves to be manœuvred to his
advantage. Sometimes they seemed to move round him
like mutes in a play, in which Peter Selamb was the hero,
and which play must end with his enrichment and aggrandisement.
But do not suppose that Peter grew proud, extravagant
or reckless. No, he took good care not to
awaken any dangerous fear in others. Quite instinctively,
and only to hide his real self, he gradually grew more
and more good-natured, pleasant and cheerful. It cost
him no effort because he felt he would earn money by it.
Yes, even his body assumed something of his cunning and
grew and expanded about the chest and stomach, in order
to remove all angles and give him a more trustworthy
appearance, so that he might the more easily achieve his
end. Peter never looked so pleased as when someone
joked with him about his getting fat.</p>

<p>The first indication of Peter’s new frame of mind was
that of learning to play “vira.” He made a third with
the bailiff Inglund and old Lundbom from the yard.</p>

<p>As a matter of fact Peter had never been on a really
bad footing with the new bailiff. Inglund was an experienced
farmer, but obstinate and averse to everything new.
He was fond of his ease, the type of man who has worked
his whole life for low wages for other people. He did not
love authority and was not unwilling to divide his responsibility.
He did not mind Peter shadowing him under the
pretence of helping him. He liked to teach whatever
he knew of his trade. “Next time I can send the boy and
need not go myself,” was his thought. And then he would
remain on his sofa smoking his pipe and smiling at silly
Peter, who ran his errands. Meanwhile Peter’s knowledge
grew daily and as he advanced with rapid strides to his
position of authority he became more and more indispensable.
And both were satisfied.</p>

<p>Thus Peter played “vira” with Inglund and Lundbom.
With what an agreeable feeling of dangers overcome did
he not sit there in the bailiff’s quarters smoking and drinking
and sending forth his orders from these seats of power
and knowledge. This was different from roaming about in
the dark outside, hungry, lonely and frightened. Peter enjoyed
the old men’s calm and circumstantial way of talking
and telling stories. It was somehow informed with a superior
and yet harmless and benevolent wordly wisdom.
And one could still feel one’s superior strength. Warmed
by his grog Peter sat smiling contentedly and drank in
their golden lore of the changing nature of the earth and
the varying seasons and the strange ways of money among
the labyrinths of the law. And all the time he saw visions
of future wealth in the thick clouds of tobacco smoke.</p>

<p>Like all new beginners Peter had, of course, shamelessly
good luck. But he did not become disagreeably smug
or unpleasantly overweening. That was a great feature
in his character. He tried to moderate his good luck in
order to be tolerated in the company. And soon he had
become quite a shrewd and skilful player.</p>

<p>Peter never regretted having learnt to play “vira.” The
cards soon proved an excellent means of communication
with useful people. The gatherings in the bailiff’s rooms
soon had some offshoots in town. Peter accompanied
the bailiff to cheery drinking and card parties with business
friends, both buyers and sellers. Thus it was by
the paths of rye, potatoes and bacon that Peter penetrated
into the town. Here Peter recognised amongst many new
faces some of the old ones from Brundin’s great crayfish
party. They were all men of seventeen stone with heavy
fists and well filled purses. But they no longer pressed
Peter down to the ground. On the contrary, he felt a
solemn exhilaration mingled with hopeful expectation
as he sat among these bulging pocketbooks. And whilst
he arranged his cards and watched his play he kept his
eyes and ears open, learned the correct jargon, studied the
market, and did not lose a thread in the skein of business
names and connections. During all this time there often
came over him the dreamy expression of one who stops
in his walk to listen to the rush of a still invisible cataract.
It was the rolling of money that Peter heard in the noise of
the streets, which is so unfamiliar to country folk. The
town to him meant money, the money that would one day
roll into Selambshof and fall into Peter’s pockets.</p>

<p>But let us return to the bailiff’s rooms and see Peter’s
second adversary. Old Lundbom, who was an expert in
the difficult game of “misère,” sat muttering, with his spectacles
slipping down over his nose and his extinguished
cigar stuck into a gap in his front teeth. From him, too,
could Peter derive much useful knowledge. As a managing
clerk he knew not only the recognised forms of business
and ways of money and the setting forth of it in
columns with figures and names. He was also secretly
a keen amateur lawyer, was this old nutcracker. The Law
of Sweden, text books of civil law, reports of law cases
and judgments constituted his favourite reading in his spare
time. Once started on that subject he was difficult to
stop. It was with a peculiar enjoyment that Peter heard
him tell of long and involved lawsuits in which large sums
had changed hands. To Peter’s simple understanding the
law was nothing else but a collection of all the tricks that
could be used to get hold of other people’s money. Old
Lundbom would have been very perplexed in his unselfish
complacency if he had seen how greedily Peter picked up
any information that might possibly be of use to him some
day.</p>

<p>One evening—it was as a matter of fact a fine and calm
evening in the beginning of July and the hay had just been
got in—the usual trio sat playing by the light of a lamp
out in the porch. Then Peter suddenly heard something
which made him think hard. Old Lundbom was speaking
about a business that had to be sold at a great loss after
the death of the owner because one of the heirs was a minor
and had to receive his inheritance in trustee stock.</p>

<p>Here at Selambshof both Laura and Tord were minors!
And their father had lain in bed for half a year past. If
he died now—how could Peter become bailiff?</p>

<p>Peter tried in vain to lure Lundbom into a discussion
of the case of Selambshof. He could not force a direct
question over his lips. He was somehow afraid to give
himself away, and his old lurking fear beset him again
in this stupid, meaningless fashion. It would have been
quite natural for him to ask questions about the future
risks of the estate. But then we all have such fits....</p>

<p>That night Peter lay sleepless. Selambshof was once
more a besieged fortress. Even Brundin’s ghost haunted
the dual silence. A sad relapse...!</p>

<p>As early as four o’clock he put on his trousers and stole
to his father. The old man lay put away in a small room
by himself far away on the ground floor towards the north.
In former days the soiled linen had been kept there. Oskar
Selamb had now overlived his time seventeen years. There
must after all have been something in old Enoch’s toughness
and vitality. But last Christmas he had been ill for
some time and since then he had never troubled to get up
again. He thought it more comfortable in bed. Now
he lay there with his chin in the air and his long grey beard
in waves over the sheet. He did not snore at all. A
spider came out of a corner and ran quickly over the
counterpane. Was the old man dead? Peter started and
stole with trembling limbs up to the bedside. No! Oskar
Selamb lay awake staring with his bleared, grey eyes at
the brown damp stains on the ceiling.</p>

<p>“How are you, father?” Peter said anxiously.</p>

<p>The old man’s voice was as rusty as if it had not been
used for years:</p>

<p>“Been running,” he muttered pointing at the damp
stains.</p>

<p>“But I asked how you were, father.”</p>

<p>Hedvig occupied the room next door and it was she
who nursed the old man. She insisted on doing it.
Now her father pointed with his thumb to her room.</p>

<p>“Up?” he wondered anxiously.</p>

<p>“But I wanted to know how you felt, father?”</p>

<p>“Must not wash me,” whined Oskar Selamb. “Cold
water!—don’t wash me...!”</p>

<p>Then Hedvig suddenly stood in the door. She was
dressed in a torn old dressing gown. Her black hair was
brushed tight over the temples and hung over her shoulders
in a long shining plait, which looked as if it had
been plaited by hard, mean fingers. She was still pale
with a strange, deathly pallor, and her dark eyes were
awake, as intensely awake as if the sweet drops of sleep
had never been poured into them.</p>

<p>“What’s the matter now?”</p>

<p>She spoke in a tone as if she had been lying reproaching
herself the whole night.</p>

<p>Peter felt uncomfortable. Did people not sleep in this
house of a night. He did not particularly like to see
Hedvig. Brundin’s shadow hung over her still. She was
like a ghost from the time of his great fear. And then
she was religious. She had a sort of secret understanding
with the gods of which Peter in his innermost heart was
still rather frightened. Yes, however one approached
her, one seemed to be burnt up. But all the same Peter
managed the business splendidly. He resembled a man
playing ball with a live coal which is still too hot to hold
for long in his hand. Though frightened himself he directed
her fear into a channel where there might slumber
things of use to Peter Selamb.</p>

<p>“I woke up and felt so anxious about father,” he muttered.
“I felt as if something was going to happen to
him.”</p>

<p>“Do you think I am not listening?” Hedvig said, shrugging
her shoulders.</p>

<p>“We have not always been as we ought to be to poor
father,” sighed Peter.</p>

<p>Hedvig’s beautiful face hardened and she assumed the
expression of an injured martyr.</p>

<p>“Don’t I wear myself out for him? Haven’t I nursed
him day and night since he has been confined to his bed?”</p>

<p>Peter was not so convinced that her nursing was so
tender. When he thought of lying ill and being washed
by Hedvig’s hands he felt cold shivers down his back.
But he took care not to show it.</p>

<p>“Yes, Hedvig, you are a real saint. But Laura and
Stellan, who never come to see father—and I who—yes,
we shall get our punishment.”</p>

<p>Over Hedvig’s face there spread a glimmer of satisfaction.</p>

<p>“What kind of punishment will that be?”</p>

<p>“Oh, father might die, for example. Do you know
what would happen if father dies before Tord is of age?
They will sell the estate for an old song and we shall
become paupers. But if we can keep it we are sure to
be well off, all of us.”</p>

<p>Peter said no more. He only sighed and then he went
back to his room to recover his lost sleep.</p>

<p>That same day old Selamb was moved up into a big,
light and airy room facing east. Peter spied on Hedvig
and received several proofs that his words had taken effect.
She was evidently frightened, for secretly she redoubled
her efforts. Enviously and with a look of silent
reproach to the whole world she watched incessantly over
her father. With a sort of gloomy, obstinate determination
she wore herself out with her cares.</p>

<p>Peter’s own worry was agreeably relieved. He felt
that he had given the matter into good hands. Sister
Hedvig was now to be numbered among the many that
struggled in the cause of Peter Selamb.</p>

<p>Peter had a habit of stealing in to glance at the old
man now and then. It was quite edifying to see him lying
there washed and brushed between white sheets in the
sparkling sunshine. Peter felt something of the pleasure
of the merchant who goes to his safe and turns over his
gilt-edge securities. One day Peter brought a bunch of
flowers in his hand. Flowers in Peter’s hand! That was,
of course, a piece of pure superstition, the offer of a
bribe to the Powers. His expression was strange, for he
was probably afraid of being found out. But as nobody
was in the room he put the flowers quickly into a glass
and placed them on the bed-table. Then he stood there
quite a long while with his head on one side and he felt
quite moved.</p>

<p>After that there were almost always flowers in the glass
when Peter came. Yes, Hedvig had also begun to pick
flowers. And they did not wither in her hand. No, they
looked perfectly fresh and bright on the bed-table. But
all the same there was a kind of suspicious aversion in
her movements, and she did not like to look at them.
It was all so new and strange. One would scarcely have
recognised the old Selambshof. A stranger coming in for
a few days only would have thought that he was moving
amongst the angels.</p>

<p>The only one who did not like the change was old Selamb.
He had grown accustomed to the dim light, the
dirt, the knocks, and sour faces. This quiet, bright room
worried him in some way. Into his dull brain some
thought of illness and death must have penetrated when
he found himself treated like a feeble invalid. He followed
Hedvig’s silent movements with suspicious glances.
He was stubborn, whined, and indulged in foolish little
pinpricks and impotent acts of spite, all of which she
suffered with a secret joy as adding spice to her martyrdom.
But the old man’s hate was especially directed towards
the flowers, that strange innovation that smelt of a
funeral. One day the glass was empty and he pointed
with a grin under the bed. He had thrown them into the
bedchamber.</p>

<p>And so that was the end of the flowers, and indeed
there could never be flowers for long within the four
walls of Selambshof. Peter was not very disappointed.
One can’t always be sentimental. Moreover during subsequent
“vira” parties Peter had made further inquiries
and now knew more. The matter would not be so hopeless
even if his father did die. But he took good care not
to tell Hedvig. There was no harm in being careful.</p>

<p>It now only remained to enlist old Hermansson in the
company of those who lived and worked for Peter Selamb.
He felt that this was where the shoe pinched. But though
he loitered about Ekbacken he still refrained from
approaching the old man. He came over to consult his
guardian about the management of the estate. He did not
directly complain of the bailiff, but he managed to convey
discreetly that the bailiff spent most of his time lying on
his sofa, smoking his pipe. But still the old man did not
grasp his excellent idea of dismissing Inglund and making
the capable and conscientious Peter bailiff.</p>

<p>However much Peter pondered over the matter he could
not guess why old Hermansson was so distant and on his
dignity toward him, whilst he yet seized every occasion to
show his fatherly interest in Stellan. That lazy, supercilious
Stellan who strutted about in his uniform and
sneered and looked important when he occasionally came
home after his idiotic drill. Peter had an economic contempt
for everything in uniform, which showed how simple
he was, and how much he still had to learn from life. If
he had only observed old Hermansson a little more
closely, as with his head held high and his hand inside the
lapel of his coat he strutted up and down the avenue by the
side of Stellan with his glittering braid and sword belt,
he would perhaps have understood a good deal better.</p>

<p>Everything striking and challenging stirred Peter’s egoism,
though it still sought to hide itself.</p>

<p>Whilst he scratched his head, a thought flashed through
his brain: “If I could think of something sufficiently
mad, perhaps it would work better,” he thought, and soon
after he conceived the brilliant idea that was to bring
matters to a successful issue.</p>

<p>After weeks of careful preparation he marched off one
day to Ekbacken. It was a fine windy day in May and
down at the repairing slip they were just fitting out Herman’s
fine, new cutter. Herman himself was standing
on the pier dressed in the uniform of the Royal Yacht
Club and gave orders to a crowd of lazy-looking youths
who had succeeded the old sailors. Peter shook his head
as he passed. It positively hurt him to see such expensive
toys.</p>

<p>In the smoke-room at Ekbacken a card table and an
easy chair were placed between the Marieberg stove and
a new piece of furniture, a mahogany and glass monstrosity
containing coloured silk ribbons and the gilt insignia
of all the secret societies in which the owner of the house
held high rank. There old Hermansson now sat playing
patience.</p>

<p>“What do you want here, my friend?” muttered the old
man without looking up from his cards.</p>

<p>“Well, there was something I had to tell you. You
know that it is a very long time since father said anything
rational. But today when I went in to see him as usual
he seemed to have brightened up. He fumbled after my
hand and then he said: ‘You must go and thank my old
friend. You must go and thank old William for all he
has done for old Selambshof.’ Yes, that’s what he said.
And I felt so strange because it was just as if father
would not have long to live. That was all I wanted to
tell you.”</p>

<p>His guardian looked up from his cards with an expression
of solemn sympathy and quiet reproach:</p>

<p>“Well, well, did he really say that, dear old Oskar?
Yes, it really does me good to hear that there are still
some people who are grateful. I will go and see him as
soon as possible.”</p>

<p>Peter went home contented. A visit was exactly what
he wished for. The following day old Hermansson came.
It evidently affected him to see the invalid. Much moved
and very solemn he walked up to the bed:</p>

<p>“Good-morning, dear old Oskar!”</p>

<p>Old Selamb grunted something in his beard. He did
not seem specially pleased at the meeting.</p>

<p>“How are things with you, old friend? I am ashamed
that I have not been to see you for such a long time.”</p>

<p>The invalid was still not interested. Peter had to intervene.</p>

<p>“It’s William. Don’t you see, father, that it is William
who has been so good to us all?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Oskar, you recognise old William, don’t you?”</p>

<p>Old Selamb seemed to be growing impatient. He
looked critically at his old friend:</p>

<p>“Seedy,” he muttered, “damned seedy.”</p>

<p>Peter did not like the turn the conversation had taken.</p>

<p>He suddenly sat down on the edge of the bed with his
back to old Hermansson. Then he looked his father full
in the eyes, touched his pocket and showed the corner of
a paper bag. Then the invalid’s face suddenly assumed
a keen, wide-awake and almost human expression, and he
stretched out a trembling hand to his son:</p>

<p>“Peter ... look after ... estate,” he muttered, in his
deep, rusty voice. “Peter shall manage the estate....”</p>

<p>“Now he seems to be getting excited again,” whispered
Peter to old Hermansson. “It is dangerous for him to get
excited. But he usually calms down if he gets something
to chew.”</p>

<p>Peter took some crumbs of cheese out of the paper bag
and gave them to his father, who devoured them with
avidity and then sank into his usual apathy again.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson stood in deep thought. Here lay the
sick friend of his youth on the bed he would never leave.
In a lucid moment he first sends a touching greeting and
then when he came to see him his reason once more flashes
up and he begs help for his first-born. It was almost like
a command from the grave.</p>

<p>Peter’s guardian seized his hand and pressed it warmly:</p>

<p>“Old Oskar shall be obeyed,” he said, “you shall manage
Selambshof!”</p>

<p>Peter, alarmed and startled, protested, but the old man
was firm:</p>

<p>“You and none else,” he said in a tone that suffered no
contradiction.</p>

<p>Then he went home to his patience again.</p>

<p>Peter had succeeded by a clever use of his father’s insatiable
greed for old cheese with caraway seeds in it.
Day after day he had been sitting there on the edge of
the bed tempting him with a piece of cheese in his hands,
till the old man learnt the formula that opened the gates
of joy to him.</p>

<p>It is generally the boldest and stupidest tricks that succeed.
Peter never forgot the caraway cheese. He used
it, as a matter of fact, throughout his life.</p>

<p>Thus half a year later Peter became manager at Selambshof.
He had developed quickly. He began as a
coarse, lumbering, hulking hireling. But this massive
foundation concealed by a certain smiling good temper
and maudlin sentimentality was rather misleading to those
who were not warned by the quick flashes in his cunning
bear’s eyes.</p>

<p>It was at this point that the firstborn of the family got
the nickname “Peter the Boss,” a name which stuck to him
all his life and under which he was known in wide circles.</p>

<p>Thus Peter the Boss now sat enthroned in the office at
Selambshof. Now he wandered in the perfection of his
power through the domains of Selambshof, controlled
only by Peter the Boss himself. But he did not swagger.
He did not become an absolute tyrant as old Enoch had
been in his time. He did not worry people too much.
He only had a habit of turning up grinning on the most
unexpected occasions. You never knew where you had
him. There was no possibility of pilfering as in Brundin’s
time. Peter was content with that. His desire was
not power, but possession. There were many things he
reflected upon, but always from the point of view of
“yours” or “mine,” preferably “mine.” And then slowly
he began to walk in Brundin’s footsteps. But without the
boldness and rashness of that “fairy prince.” He felt his
way carefully. He left no traces. He began with modest
schemes. He joked his way through, so that you never
knew when you had him until you suddenly found you
had agreed to something after a jolly evening with cards
and drink. One of the old customers of the estate, for
instance, wanted potatoes at the old price, which was
really too low. Peter laughed at him. But when they
sat down to cards, he said he would be damned if he
shouldn’t have the potatoes if he won that night. In this
way Peter recovered half the difference of price and the
matter was settled in the early morning. Peter pretended
that he settled the business whilst in his cups, and the
other was welcome to think he had got the better of Peter.
Or perhaps some cab proprietor wanted to buy hay.
There was a scarcity of hay that spring—but not at
Selambshof. This was a fine chance for Peter. He
snapped out a very high price. The proprietor offered
two-thirds. Business seemed impossible. But as they sat
there hobnobbing with each other they began to argue
about the height of the Eiffel Tower. Peter maintained
it was 300 metres high. If he had not just been reading
about it he would not have mentioned it. The cab proprietor
doubted it.</p>

<p>“All right, let us lay a wager,” said Peter. “All right,”
replied the cab proprietor. “A thousand kronor,” said
Peter and winked. But the cab proprietor became
thoughtful.</p>

<p>“I am like a little child when I have won a wager,”
grinned Peter. The cab proprietor made a rapid calculation
and then agreed to the bet in the cloud of smoke.
And Peter won the bet and the cab proprietor got the hay
at his own price. So you see that even the Eiffel Tower
has its uses.</p>

<p>In this way much business was done in the good old
times.</p>

<p>Soon there was not a single turnip sold but Peter the
Boss managed in some cunning way or other to exact his
toll. The money came rolling in and he already had a
nice little banking account.</p>

<p>But conscience! Did not Peter understand that this was
bad faith towards his principals? Did he not think it
ugly to rob his brothers and sisters in this way? No,
when it came to the point Peter did not think of principals
or brothers and sisters or anything at all in that way.
The whole thing was a matter between himself and Brundin.
Peter was taking his revenge on Brundin, that was
all. He beat the nightmare of his childhood on his own
ground. So strange are our victories sometimes. Peter
felt a delightful relief after each successful coup, a relief
that was almost related to a good conscience.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Peter the Boss grew fatter and more good-tempered
and jovial. He patted Isaksson, the housekeeper,
on the back and lent Stellan, who was always in
a tight corner, money with pleasure. Then he offered
punch and with his customary luck won the whole lot back
from him again, so that Stellan had to write an I.O.U.
for the double amount, for he had to have the money.
Stellan rose, shrugging his shoulders, when he had written
it and looked contemptuously at his elder brother:</p>

<p>“Just like the Jews,” he said in his sneering voice.
“Hang it all, Peter, you do look common. It is so under-class
to become bloated with spirit!”</p>

<p>“Dear, oh dear!” said Peter in his softest voice, “didn’t
you notice that before you began to play?”</p>

<p>It is true that Peter drank a good deal. Spirit and
business melted together with him so that he could not
distinguish one from the other. That was why he always
drank with a good conscience and grew fat with a good
conscience. Because in Sweden in those days it was still
easier for fat people to do business than for thin.</p>

<p>If Peter could think of nothing else he used to put a
bottle in his pocket and march down to Tord, who now
lived in “The Rookery,” with all his crows and snakes
and foxes. He was a queer fish, Tord, but he was always
good enough to drink a glass with. In school he had
made himself impossible long ago, but instead of school
he sat at home reading a lot of bulky old volumes, and
amongst the working people of the estate he was the object
of a certain superstitious reverence on account of his
strange ways and his learning. Then one day he flung
the books on the floor and decided to turn painter—animal
painter. That was after he had taken in another
inmate, a two-legged one this time, a mysterious creature
who seldom appeared in daylight, but who passed for an
artist, a real artist from the Academy. His name was
Eklund and he was an incurable bohemian, contemptuous
of the world, and cynical. Nobody knew where Tord
had caught this fish, but it was probably in some ditch
on the outskirts of the town. Anyhow he was now going
to teach Tord to paint animals.</p>

<p>Yes, Tord was a queer fellow who sooner or later would
be sure to go to the dogs, but nobody would be any the
poorer for that, at least not Peter, so he could always
drink a glass with him in anticipation of the catastrophe.
And that strange creature Eklund did not spoil
things either. It tasted rather good to drink with such
impossible fellows. Tord did not, of course, talk much—he
usually sat and stared. But with Eklund one could
discuss the profoundest problems, if only he had enough
inside him. He was one of those radical devils who believe
neither in Heaven nor Hell. Peter protested with
inimitable sentimentality against his acid cynicism, but secretly
he enjoyed it. In his inmost heart he had a feeling
it somehow sanctioned his little tricks....</p>

<p>About that time the guardian of Selambshof died.</p>

<p>Old Hermansson had of late been so unnaturally sound
that he could not have long to live. And one morning
he could not get out of his bed. He had died during the
night from paralysis of the heart.</p>

<p>At the funeral in the little granite church Herman
sobbed between his two old aunts, his only relations. But
Peter clung instinctively to his sister Hedvig. This was
something in her line, he thought. Here she held the direct
connections. Far away from the cynicism of Eklund
Peter the Boss stood there anxiously wondering if this
business would not bring him some profit in its train.
And had he not been kind to his own aged, sick father,
and had him removed into a better room, and seen to it
that he had the best care? Yes, there in the church Peter
was still making his little efforts to cheat the Almighty.
But out here beside the open grave he grew unctuous. It
was no longer cowardice in face of the last judgment.
That was an exquisite refuge when compared with the
dark hole in front of him. Before the grave every man
is shaken down to his most elementary instincts. Peter
the Boss ate ashes at the thought of creeping down there
away from everything that he possessed and would possess.
Fancy having nothing more, absolutely nothing! He
stood there pale and ill with his hat in his hand and
gulped down the lump in his throat like a fish out of
water. He would willingly have sacrificed a whole year’s
salary if he could have got away from it all.</p>

<p>At last he sat in his carriage and rolled away from
Death’s domains into those of Selambshof. His sickness
disappeared by and by. He felt with a feverish sigh how
business was resuming its normal sway over his thoughts.
But still he was like a man who, after a dangerous sea
voyage, feels the movement of the sea even though he is
walking on the green earth.</p>

<p>There was a dinner at Ekbacken. To everybody’s
amazement, Peter rose and made a speech. After the
day’s emotions he was very sentimental. Oh, how delightful
it was to let yourself go and to be moved by, and
grateful for, everything, and to be filled with great, beautiful
and solemn emotions. There were no bounds to the
greatness and noble philanthropy of old Hermansson and
to what they all had to thank his noble generous heart for.
Peter then turned to the only son of this great and noble
man. He did not need to describe what Herman was suffering
at that moment. But he must not feel himself alone
in the world. Everybody present suffered with him. And
if it was hard for Herman to throw himself at once into
business in the midst of his grief, he must never forget
that Selambshof lay next door to old Ekbacken. A helping
hand from Peter Selamb would not be lacking when
required....</p>

<p>Peter had tears in his eyes. He was whole-heartedly
a “helping hand.” His emotion was almost genuine, and
he felt that his tears watered soil of which he might himself
reap the harvest.</p>

<p>Herman had never liked Peter, but had rather avoided
him. But now he had no power of resistance. Childishly
ashamed of his own tears, he sought cover behind these
of Peter. He believed him because just now he felt the
need of belief in somebody. And there was nobody else
to hand. Stellan was so strangely silent and cold just
now. He was somehow not made to be a consoler. But
Peter overwhelmed him by his rhapsodies, helpfulness,
and his massive vitality overflowing with life and animation.
There were not many moments when he left Herman
alone during the following days. And he used to talk
about Laura. It helped Herman in the bitter loneliness
that fastened upon his still unguarded soul. Twice Laura
had been allowed to go back to her boarding school.
And hitherto she had to a certain extent been right when
she thought that both she and Herman were too young to
get married. But now she was to stay at home, said
Peter. He had telegraphed her on the day of the death
of Herman’s father and could not understand why she
had not come back already. Did she really deserve such
a husband as Herman, such a jolly good fellow, heir to
an honourable name and a substantial fortune? And so
Peter’s thoughts turned to money again. Did Herman
fully realise how rich he was? Ekbacken—oh, it had immense
possibilities! Peter saw them, because he had already
had business experience. And, as he had said
before, he would help Herman in word and deed now
when everything had to be cleared up after the death of
his father.</p>

<p>Everything went as Peter wished. He became administrator
of the estate of the late timber merchant and shipbuilder,
William Hermansson. A week ago he would
have shaken his head at such a possibility. Now the thing
was almost obvious.</p>

<p>Old Lundbom had to supply the necessary expert knowledge.
He was so touched and so flattered when Peter
came and wanted to make him guardian over his father
that he willingly sacrificed his evening hours to clear up
all difficulties of the administration. He had managed
Ekbacken’s business practically alone during recent years—but
without having asked for a penny’s increase of
salary. The old man had never realised that one might
be clever on one’s own account too. He was a servant and
nothing but a servant. And now in the midst of his sincere
grief at the death of his beloved old master he took
a childish pleasure in seeing his knowledge of law being
put into practice on such an important occasion.</p>

<p>The winding-up of the estate was entirely Lundbom’s
work. It gave Peter a very interesting insight into the
affairs of Ekbacken and six thousand crowns into the bargain.
At first he made a few diffident attempts to refuse
the money that Herman pressed on him. Herman was
flushed with excitement and very stiff in the back. Had
not the estate shown more than three hundred thousand
crowns assets? Then he supposed he could afford to pay
a friend for his solicitude and care. Peter gave in in
good time and put the cheque in his pocket with a sigh:</p>

<p>“Thank you, dear Herman! We Selambs are unfortunately
too poor to say no!”</p>

<p>When this matter was settled they walked about a long
time on the estate discussing the future of Ekbacken.
Herman wanted to give up building barges and instead
wanted to build racing yachts of a type that had just won
through. It was a high-class and interesting-quality work.
He would build his own boats and compete for
prizes just as people kept racehorses in their stables. It
would be a fine advertisement and would perhaps interest
Laura.</p>

<p>Peter looked thoughtful but did not contradict him.</p>

<p>They came out on to the highroad, which was dusty and
worn out by the constantly increasing traffic. The heaps
of road metal and the stone-cutters’ sheds were drawing
nearer the old oaks. The town was grinding the hills
around it to powder. Soon the last grey granite fortress of
Ekbacken would fall. But Herman swore that he would
defend his own idyllic home. There were already plenty
of people who came to him and wanted to buy sites for
factories. But his father’s old Ekbacken must not be split
up and spoilt in that way.</p>

<p>Peter still did not contradict him. He was absorbed in
deep thought. Suddenly he warmly pressed his future
brother-in-law’s hand:</p>

<p>“You are a fine fellow, Herman. Damn me, but you are
a fine fellow!”</p>

<p>After this Peter the Boss stalked homewards—with the
first great cheque of his life in his pocket he stalked homewards
this cold, still evening in spring. He felt strangely
cool about his forehead, and sometimes he felt as if he were
treading on air. Strange how everything played into his
hands. By making Lundbom guardian he ruled absolutely
at Selambshof. Through Laura he would soon be able to
control Ekbacken. And the town with its thousand possibilities,
crept nearer and nearer with every hour.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">X<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">LAURA’S MARRIAGE</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">For more than two years Laura had been at a boarding
school in Neuchatel. She had been home a few times,
at Christmas and Midsummer, but soon she had contrived
to get away again. It was quite amusing to meet
Herman for a week or two. And it was awfully nice to
have him to think of in lonely and sentimental moments.
But she was afraid to bind herself to him quite definitely.</p>

<p>“We can’t marry yet, of course,” she said, “and then it is
better not to wear out each other’s feelings.”</p>

<p>It was always so delightful to say good-bye to Herman.
His grief did her good. There was always a faithful heart
waiting for her whilst she flew out into the wide world.</p>

<p>And it may even have happened that Laura cried a little
in the train.</p>

<p>But it was always with the happiest laughter and the
most excited talk that she rushed back to her school friends.
And she was greeted with delighted shouts of welcome.
For though she had no real friend, she was liked by all.
They never got tired of ruffling her unusual, fair hair, which
in the general opinion, was frightfully pretty. She was the
obvious leader whenever they wanted to throw dust in the
eyes of the poor teachers on returning home too late after
walks or after mysterious expeditions in the dense garden
of an evening. With a mixture of fear and unwilling admiration,
the good German teachers nicknamed her “Die blonde
Lüge.”</p>

<p>Had Laura so much to lie about then? Well! perhaps
a little flirtation with the students in the town.
But nothing serious. As a matter of fact Laura was very
careful—much more careful than one would have believed
if one had been allowed to read her diary, written in profoundest
secrecy. For there she exaggerated and romanced
in a most charming manner and seized every opportunity to
make herself interesting to herself. Yes, she falsified her
own memoirs, quite gaily and airily. All of which your
moralist would no doubt consider the height of mendacity,
but after all it does not signify very much when you are
at boarding school.</p>

<p>“Die blonde Lüge” had nothing to do with a certain little
Polish lady who was packed off because she came home
much too late one evening ... and who received the following
morning a parcel containing neither more nor less
than her corsets.</p>

<p>That was a great and mysterious event which became the
subject of endless whispered conversations, when the light
was turned out in the evenings.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>But then there came a telegram and a letter, saying that
old Hermansson was dead and that she must go home.
Then Laura felt at once that the best thing she could do was
to fall seriously in love with her faithful Herman. And
strange to say, it was not at all so difficult to say good-bye
to Neuchatel, as she had thought it would be. The prospect
of meeting Herman alone, free, and independent was quite
agreeable to her. Strange, but it actually seemed as if old
Hermansson had, in spite of all his kindness, stood between
her and Herman. Now she really enjoyed indulgence in
all the romantic sentiments of her diary.</p>

<p>Before Laura left, the idea came to her that she would
become properly engaged to Herman at a distance. This
they did and they exchanged rings by post. It was a sentimental
idea of a schoolgirl conceived in order to impress the
other girls and to make a brilliant exit.</p>

<p>And so Laura at last returned home to make ready for
the great wedding trip with the luxurious hotels and shops
and the tunnels and moonlight nights. She sat there in the
train and grew more sure of her love for Herman. She
felt a real thrill when she saw him on the platform, a delicious
thrill straight through her heart. He looked so
awfully handsome, refined, and serious in his tall hat and
mourning band, one could not really wish for a better companion
on a wedding trip.</p>

<p>Herman wanted the wedding to take place in the autumn.
One could not have the wedding immediately after the
funeral.</p>

<p>Summer came, a delightful summer of sunshine, and
Herman was pleasant, devoted and chivalrous. There was
nothing but flowers and admiration and knightly courtesy.
They were out sailing a great deal in Herman’s fine new
cutter, which of course was called “Laura.” Herman himself
had designed the boat and expected a lot from it. He
was known as “The Engineer” at the yard. He had spent a
couple of years at the School of Technology but he had
left it because he was dissatisfied with the instruction. Now
he was sitting there holding the tiller, tall, slim and sunburnt,
wearing the uniform of the Royal Yacht Club, which
was also very becoming. And Laura lay in a white sweater
and white yachting shoes in the sunshine on deck and
thought it was good that he sat and kept a look out with
his faithful blue eyes whilst the ship of their lives elegantly
tacked into the brilliant future.</p>

<p>Herman entered the boat for several races. Unhappily
owing to a series of annoying accidents, such as bad luck
with the wind, and small breakdowns, he was unable to win
a prize. But anyhow there was open-air dancing afterwards
and a regatta with Chinese lanterns and fireworks. And
Laura came home quite excited with dancing and wine and
the sound of lapping water in a blue darkness full of kisses
and the sound of clinking glasses and songs and hearty
curses and bright, sinuous, reflections and sudden bouquets
of light shooting up above the edge of the forests.</p>

<p>Laura was really unreservedly happy during this period.
It seemed as if the happy care-free years down in a Southern
atmosphere had set fire to her and thawed her. She had
acquired a certain sweetness that was unusual under the
skies of Selambshof. During these summer months it
seemed as if Selambshof had lost its power over her. She
hovered laughingly around the coarse and greedy imp,
Peter the Boss. She smiled at Hedvig’s bitter, stiff and
offended airs. She moved like a happy and contented
stranger in and out of this dreary malevolent house, where
the former naughty Laura had once sat drinking vinegar in
order to escape into the world.</p>

<p>Laura was just twenty years old. The particular kind
of egoism that comes from bad nerves was completely alien
to her. She blossomed out under kisses, which had not
yet become the serious business of life. It was her season
of roses. All the good elements in her nature had their
great opportunity. Would this soft mellow rose-perfume
penetrate to the core of her being? Where there is a fund
of health there are always possibilities. Things had never
looked so promising.</p>

<p>Laura had taken it into her head that they would take a
flat in town. The idea was constantly in her mind. What
supreme comfort it would be to live amongst restaurants,
shops and theatres with plenty of pin money! She begged
and implored Herman, but on this point he was really immovable.
He felt it would be treason to his dead father to
leave Ekbacken. And lo! Laura yielded like a good child.
She even liked him because he knew his own mind.</p>

<p>She also gave in on another point. She had dreamed
that they would start on their great wedding trip at once.
But Herman, who had a dispute, concerning shore rights,
with the town to attend to, had to wait till the spring,
when the matter would be regulated. He had to defend
his dead father’s old Ekbacken. He seemed to gather
strength from the mourning band on his sleeve.</p>

<p>If only that strength had survived a little longer....
The wedding day came nearer and nearer.</p>

<p>Stellan came home from the summer manœuvres, brought
his heels together with a slight click of his spurs and
greeted his pretty sister with ironical politeness. He had
grown into a witty and elegant young officer. The uniform
was exactly the right mask for his easy cynicism and light
irony. Now he kissed Laura’s hand.</p>

<p>“So you’re going to get married,” he said, “and you’re
sticking to your old lake. What an idyl, my dear Laura.”</p>

<p>Laura snatched her hand away shyly. She somehow
could not answer with a smile. Stellan made quite another
impression on her than the others at Selambshof. He
was the real brother of the old, naughty Laura. Her love
was in some way afraid of him. Yes, she was also afraid
on Herman’s account. Quite instinctively Laura did all
she could to avoid Stellan during the next days, though it
was he who had undertaken all the arrangements for the
wedding.</p>

<p>Now the morning of the wedding had arrived. Laura
came for the last time out of the room in which she had
slept as a little girl. She left it without regrets. Selambshof
had never been a home. She remembered how lonely
she had been these last days. Nobody had sat by her bedside
the last night and talked late in whispers far into the
night. She was not afraid. One could not be afraid of
Herman. No, but she had been lying in her bed longing
to have at least a little letter from a school friend to
read.</p>

<p>As Laura walked down the passage she suddenly heard
Stellan’s voice in the smoking room. It must have been
Peter he was talking to, because the replies sounded like
coarse mutterings. She was just stealing past the door
to find Hedvig, for today she felt a strange aversion to meeting
her brothers alone. But then something made her stop
and listen. She heard her own name and Herman’s pronounced.
“Laura ... she ... will be able to twist the
poor boy round her little finger....”</p>

<p>It was Stellan’s voice—curiously penetrating—like
drinking iced water. Then she heard Peter mumble in a
thick voice, expressive at one and the same time of satisfaction
and discontent:</p>

<p>“There are sure to be difficulties in the long run with
Ekbacken—not a business man at all.”</p>

<p>Laura heard no more, for somebody had begun to hammer
in the hall. For a moment she stood motionless. She
felt a little sick from the smell of freshly scrubbed floors,
which lingered in the dark passage. She suddenly felt the
oppressiveness of the high dismal house again. For a
fraction of a second a strange sensation of being in some
way cheated shot through her. Then she became angry—exceedingly
angry with Stellan and Peter. But she
said nothing, she did not go in to them, but hurried down
to Ekbacken to greet Herman and convince herself that
he was still the same. She remained there so long that he
grew anxious lest she should not have time to dress for the
wedding.</p>

<p>Then the guests began to arrive. Stellan had managed
to collect quite a fair number of fine folk. The dowager
from Kolsnäs and her son were there. Lähnfeldt’s elegant
carriage drove up to the door. But Percy Hill was abroad
and was only represented by the fine old Dutch master he
had sent as a wedding present. Peter’s contribution was a
collection of the wealthiest customers of Selambshof.
Herman had very few relatives left, except the two old
aunts, who had been at the funeral and who looked very
shy and plain.</p>

<p>Hedvig demonstratively put on a dark severe-looking
frock and she spread a chill around her. Tord was not
there. He did not go to bourgeois parties.</p>

<p>The marriage ceremony was to take place in the hall,
which was decorated with all the bright autumn flowers
the old gardener had been able to collect in the garden.</p>

<p>They had almost succeeded in concealing the shabbiness
and gloom of the room. Laura was late. The clergyman
had already had time to smell the dahlias three times
before she appeared. Her expression had something of
both defiance and anxiety, as if the guests had assembled
there to amuse themselves at her expense. But Herman’s
looks apologized both for the delay and for his having
to stand on the right of his lady.</p>

<p>Laura’s voice sounded impatient when she answered her
“yes.” It sounded as if she had been kept waiting at the
booking office window before a long journey.</p>

<p>During dinner she was also nervous. She was silent, and
emptied her glass absent-mindedly, and drummed with her
fingers on the table during the clergyman’s speech. The
speech was somewhat lugubrious. It seemed as if he had
only two speeches to choose from, one for weddings and
the other for funerals, and as if he had fallen on the wrong
one.</p>

<p>Laura’s brothers were sitting opposite, further down the
table. There was a challenging and hostile flash in her
eyes, as she looked at them. She suddenly raised her glass
to Peter, who looked like a dressed-up farmhand:</p>

<p>“Your health, Mr. Bailiff!” she said. “It feels queer to
be in evening dress, doesn’t it?”</p>

<p>Her voice sounded strained. She looked quickly and appealingly
at Herman, who, however, did not seem to understand.
Angry at not receiving any support, though it was
for his sake she was taking her revenge, she now turned
on Stellan. Stellan had placed himself beside Elvira
Lähnfeldt, now a slim and distinguished-looking young
lady, who chatted about horses and tennis. He seemed
to enjoy paying her attention. He did it with the expression
of a man who is already accustomed to succeed
with the ladies. “Look at me,” he seemed to be saying,
“I am privileged to wear a full dress uniform. I belong
to the few who look dressed up when they wear civilian
clothes. I am born for the good things in life, for pretty
women and a fine setting.” But Laura knew her elegant
brother. She knew how to penetrate his arrogant self-assurance.
Her voice became suddenly tender and affecting:</p>

<p>“Stellan,” she said, looking into his eyes over the sparkling
champagne, “Old Hermansson died so suddenly that
neither you nor I had an opportunity of thanking him.
Now as you are sitting with Herman in front of you, I
think you ought to stand up and make a speech to his
father’s memory. For if he had not been so awfully
decent and helped you, instead of being such a really
smart officer and lady’s man as you are now, you would
have been quite an ordinary little bank-clerk or teacher
of mathematics or something equally ridiculous and
civilian!”</p>

<p>Miss Lähnfeldt looked as if she had heard something
positively indecent. Stellan bit his lip and grew a trifle
pale. He did not rise, and he made no speech, but he
straightened himself as if to salute and lifted his glass,
without saying a word, to Herman, who looked very embarrassed
and could not understand at all what had come
over his dear Laura.</p>

<p>But Laura at once became wildly gay. She had had
her revenge and she could now say good-bye to stupid old
Selambshof.</p>

<p>She looked smiling over all the flowers and the heads
in order to say a last contemptuous good-bye to the old
dining-room where she had eaten so much porridge and
where they had given each other so many kicks underneath
the table. Then her glance fastened on the portrait of old
Enoch over the green settee. It was more visible than
usual because of two sconces which had been moved in
from the blue room. The old man stood there with his
steel-capped stick in his thin claw-like hand and fixed
his glance upon her. Laura had never observed before
what scornful, sneering eyes he had. It was as if he
looked straight through her love.</p>

<p>“You may wriggle about, my doll, but you can’t get
away from me, anyway.”</p>

<p>She took Herman’s hand: “Won’t it soon be over?”
she murmured.</p>

<p>At last they said good-bye. Laura was already standing
in the porch dressed in her fur coat. Then she saw
Herman walk up to Stellan and Peter and pat them on the
shoulders. He looked very moved and solemn and magnanimous.
She could understand that he asked them not
to be annoyed with her. Stellan shrugged his shoulders,
and she could see by his lips what he answered:</p>

<p>“Stage-fright....”</p>

<p>Then the silence of the cold star-lit autumn night was
broken by a roar of deep bass voices, and then there was
the pattering of rice against the carriage windows and a forward
jerk of the horses.</p>

<p>Laura flung herself into Herman’s arms. She wanted to
flee away from something at any cost—as if she did not
want to see anything or know anything.</p>

<p>The following day Hedvig came in to Peter, who was
lying on the sofa with a pipe that had gone out in the
corner of his mouth, feeling a little stale after the wedding
celebrations which he and his companions had continued
noisily until the early morning. Hedvig came slipping
in and looking paler and more severe than ever. Peter
felt really frightened of her. He felt like a big, swollen
gland which has secreted the worst excretions of sin.</p>

<p>“You will have to get somebody else to nurse father,”
said Hedvig, “I am not going to stay here any longer.
There is nothing but dissipation and vileness. Nobody
seems to think that we may be dead tomorrow. I am
going to take a course in nursing and then I shall join
the Red Cross.”</p>

<p>Peter began to fear new unforeseen expenses. He
begged and prayed, he clumsily touched on all sorts of
points. Finally he stretched out a finger and poked it
into the region of her heart:</p>

<p>“Hedvig, dear, one fine day you will also get married.”</p>

<p>Peter stopped dead. He felt as if he had sandpaper
in his throat. Hedvig stood motionless and stared at him,
with loathing in her eyes:</p>

<p>“You are disgusting” she said, in a low voice. “I hate
all men. I will never, never marry!”</p>

<p>And with that she left the room.</p>

<p>A fortnight later Hedvig had started as a probationer at
a hospital. And she never put her foot inside Selambshof.</p>

<p>Peter did not know if he felt this as a loss or relief.
Sometimes he felt as if his bad conscience had left him.
Sometimes he felt a little alarmed. With the departure of
Hedvig he seemed to have lost his last connection with
“The Powers.”</p>

<p>But Mrs. Laura at Ekbacken was very annoyed when
Peter stalked in one day and told her about Hedvig’s
new move.</p>

<p>“It really is a pity about Hedvig,” the little wife exclaimed.
“Just think how really beautiful she can be
sometimes, Herman. It almost hurts one. Couldn’t we
find her a husband some way or other, Herman dear?”</p>

<p>Mrs. Laura still lived on her honeymoon and she thought
that all people ought to marry.</p>

<p>Herman moved away the pink silk ribbon of her coquettish
boudoir cap and kissed her hair:</p>

<p>“She is as pretty as anyone can be who is not fair,” he
whispered.</p>

<p>By now Peter had gone again. This sort of thing was
unbearable. They don’t care a straw either for me or
Hedvig, he thought sadly in his loneliness. But wait a
little, Laura has still got claws in her silky hands. Herman
will feel them soon enough.</p>

<p>This thought consoled him a little.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>The honeymoon was scarcely over before Mrs. Laura
realised that there would be no wedding trip that spring.</p>

<p>No, she was definitely cheated of it, cheated of her grand
wedding trip. She had not imagined things would turn
out like that. This might possibly have been permitted to
occur in the remote future, but just now she had desired
nothing but happy surprises.</p>

<p>At first Laura told Herman nothing. She felt that it
would be humiliating to admit her condition. But she observed
him secretly. She watched for a searching or a triumphant
expression in his face. Has he been expecting
this? Was he only playing with me when he spoke about
the wedding trip, she thought. And she felt something in
her heart that almost resembled dislike. But then it struck
her how sad and strange and really impossible it was that
she was feeling dislike of her <i>own</i> Herman. And then she
went down to the office and let him kiss her behind old
Lundbom’s back. But she was not yet able to speak about
it. She felt a strange cold shame at her condition. In
her there was nothing groping with tender hands towards
the new life. It was as if this tender seed of life had been
growing outside her and not beneath her heart.</p>

<p>After a few weeks Laura had no need to decide whether
to tell or not—she simply could not hide it. She felt
sick and she could not for ever run away and hide every
morning. Laura had never been ill since she had the
measles as a child. She felt a cold dread. It was as if
her body were insulted every day. In her mirror she
seemed to see how ugly and pale she was already growing.
Still Herman said nothing. He was only doubly tender and
attentive. But Laura saw all the same a flash of irritating
pride and satisfaction in his eyes. And she turned away
and set her teeth. What sort of a knight was this whose
kisses at once produced sickness. She seemed to feel his
pride like a pain within her. And then a torrent of complaints
and accusations broke from her. Herman had
cheated her out of her wedding trip! And she had not
been allowed to live in town, as she wanted! And now she
was ill, awfully ill! And she was getting ugly, old and
ugly! And soon she would probably be dead—Yes, this
would certainly mean her death!</p>

<p>Herman made no reply to all these accusations, which
induced in him a solemn mood. He stroked her hair
softly and calmly as one would in putting a crying child
to sleep. And in the end Laura could find no other place
than his arms in which she could cry out her heart.</p>

<p>After a time she grew calmer. The first crisis was over.
It looked as if she would submit to her fate with a certain
equanimity.</p>

<p>One dark and wet December day Laura was sitting in the
bedroom window sewing some small garments. She always
locked the door so as not to be taken by surprise.
The sewing did not amuse her, but she did it in order to
pass the time.</p>

<p>“Ugh!” she had pricked her finger. She stared at the
red drop of blood, and with a long sigh let the sewing
fall into her lap.</p>

<p>Out of doors it was drizzling from the grey winter sky.
Through the bare lilac hedge Laura could see the yard.
There lay the cutter, their cutter, drawn up forlorn under
its ugly unpainted cover. Their beautiful summer cutter!
It looked like a butterfly with the wings pulled off, and
the crutches were its legs. It suddenly occurred to Laura
that the boat had never won a prize. There had always
been something to prevent it. Supposing it was not so
finely designed and built after all!</p>

<p>Laura suddenly felt terribly depressed at this thought.
She could not understand herself why she felt so sad. She
rose up groaning and went to her chest of drawers. In
the bottom drawer beneath her chemises and bits of ribbon,
there lay a small locked box. She found the key hidden
amongst her jewellery. Then she took out her diary, the
romantic diary from Neuchatel, and sat down to read it
from beginning to end. She hastened nervously through
its pages and it seemed as if she had jumped with great anxious
strides back into the past. But there was no refuge
there. She could not help sneering at all that sloppy,
girlish nonsense. No, the past was past. As she was turning
a page, a drop of blood fell on it. Laura threw
away the book. Then she saw that there were many drops
of blood on her light grey dressing gown also. “Blood,”
she thought with a shiver. “I shall give my blood. I
shall suffer and sacrifice myself for another. People say
that it is a splendid and glorious sensation. But I am not
made that way. Herman must teach me. He must treat
me more severely—bend me to it—.”</p>

<p>Laura dashed on her fur coat and galoshes and flew
down to the office where Herman sat talking to Lundbom
about the lawsuit, which looked as if it would be prolonged.</p>

<p>But Herman did not handle her firmly. He was only
kind and indulgent and gave her much well-meant advice:
“You must not go about thinking of disagreeable things:
you must just make yourself comfortable and let me look
after you.” And then he telephoned for theatre tickets for
the evening.</p>

<p>Herman did not understand that he had a soul to fight
for, a soul round which the magic circle was about to close
again.</p>

<p>Laura could not help pondering over this lawsuit, over
the shore rights. If Herman had not allowed it to interfere
she would now have been on her wedding trip. And
then all this would not have happened. No! then this
would not have happened. How Laura arrived at this conviction
seems strange, but, as we all know, our most sensible
thoughts are not the most persistent ones.</p>

<p>Laura began to hate that lawsuit. Sometimes it almost
seemed as if she wanted Herman to lose it. What if she
should go over to Peter and talk it over with him for a
moment. For the first time Laura had a certain furtive
feeling of attraction to Selambshof. She had not been
there since her wedding. But now the spirit of family
called gently to its erring child.</p>

<p>Peter sat in his office writing in his books. The room
was thick with tobacco smoke and Peter the Boss looked
so coarse and vulgar that Laura at once dismissed all the
subterfuges she had thought out.</p>

<p>“Herman’s lawsuit?” muttered Peter, “well, between
ourselves, I should have settled the matter while the door
was still open. The Town Council offered forty thousand
for the little strip of shore and it was a fine offer. If
Herman had accepted, they would never have found out
that his title was doubtful. It all hangs on some old
papers dating from the eighteenth century, and then justice
is like a lottery. But Herman won’t give up the least bit
of Ekbacken of his own free will, and of course that’s
very fine of him—but, if one wants to strike fine attitudes...!”</p>

<p>Peter leered with half-closed eyes through the smoke,
with his dull peasant cunning. Compared with Herman,
Peter looked a real monster. But all the same Laura
listened attentively to his words. She waited greedily
for a shrug of his shoulders or a note of tolerant contempt,
in order that she might, as she thought, become angry
with him and say something really nasty. But in point of
fact she was seeking with a strange sort of hunger to effect
a secret reconciliation with something within herself,
something that had been concealed by the rosy veil of her
foolish sentimentality.</p>

<p>On her way home Laura stopped in the course of the
avenue by the big oak which she and Stellan had tricked
Herman into climbing. “Were you hoarse yesterday,
Herman?” Oh! how furious she was with her husband
for having allowed himself to be tricked that day!</p>

<p>For several days she went about at Ekbacken looking
at Herman from hiding places and ambushes. She felt a
stranger to him as she beheld his open countenance. A
certain expression of unperturbed self-confidence in him
annoyed her in some way. What was he really so confident
about? He does not listen or watch, nor does he
fight to defend me and mine, she thought. Why is he not
cleverer and quicker than Peter and Stellan? Why does
he not look through them? Why does he not look
through me? Laura had a strange feeling of the insecurity
of Herman’s position—that there was a conspiracy
against him, against them. And she had an irresistible
desire to arouse him, to perturb him, and goad him on
with insidious words. They were sitting planning summer
yachting trips, when she suddenly exclaimed:</p>

<p>“Fancy if you could explore a little ashore too, Herman.”</p>

<p>When that shaft missed its mark she began to prophesy
losses and misfortunes:</p>

<p>“I am sure you will lose that stupid lawsuit, Herman.”</p>

<p>Herman replied by placing a shawl over her shoulders.
Then she seized the most dangerous weapon she could
think of and told him of the conversation she had overheard
between Stellan and Peter on her wedding day:</p>

<p>“Just fancy! they said that you were not a business man
at all, Herman; that you were a good-natured simpleton
that anyone could twist round his little finger. That’s
what they said, and I think they ought to pay for that.
You ought somehow to put them down a peg.”</p>

<p>However strange it may sound, Laura was nevertheless
still fighting for her love when she spoke like this. It
was the last spasm of her feeling for him. But Herman
understood nothing. He only became serious and pulled
a face for a moment. Then he dismissed the subject:</p>

<p>“Nonsense, child, you misunderstood them. How can
you imagine such a thing. Near relations like that!
Besides I have stolen from them the best thing they had,
their pretty sister.”</p>

<p>He wanted to kiss her on the neck, but Laura pushed
him violently away from her and ran into the bedroom,
seized by an unreasoning frenzy.</p>

<p>The last months before the birth of the child were very
difficult for Herman. He was exiled from the bedroom
into the smoky atmosphere of the study, where he had to
sleep on a sofa. He was a ridiculous, superfluous and
disagreeable person in his own home. Even the maids
were rude to him. He went about in a constant state of
nervousness in this house where he was the only man.
The poor fellow did not revolt, but his face grew longer
and longer. He busied himself with his beloved cutter,
since he was not allowed to busy himself with Laura.
Above all he felt a compelling need to go and amuse himself
with his summer things. It was as if he were still
a child, longing for the promise of the summer holidays.
He still cherished their semblance of liberty without responsibility.
But in the evening he took refuge in spirit
and his father’s game of patience—hoping that his beloved
and exquisite Laura would return to him after the
birth of her child.</p>

<p>But Laura lay on her bed staring at the ceiling. She
was full of bitterness and disappointment. Something
within her that had been deliciously softened now hardened
again and left a scar behind. She was full of anger
against Herman, who was not man enough to break down
her egoism; who gave her a child but was unable to make
her feel a mother.</p>

<p>Laura was very ill towards the end. She felt her pains
and her helplessness as direct insults by Herman. Sometimes
she almost went mad with fear at her approaching
delivery. For a woman whose being is cramped by egoism
the agony of childbirth is doubly terrible. There is
no joy in the suffering. It is martyrdom without faith.
After a struggle of three days she gave birth to a boy.
When they wanted to place the child beside her, she pushed
it away with her last remaining strength:</p>

<p>“Take it away,” she muttered, “I don’t want to see it.”</p>

<p>That was the first day. Afterwards she calmed down
and showed a certain interest in her child. But she could
not bear to hear it cry. Then it had to be taken away
into another room at once. And she could not be persuaded
to suckle the newborn child. Thus far Nature had forced
her, but now at last she could say “No.” Oh what a joy
to be able to say “no” at last!</p>

<p>When a mother is not delivered of her egoism it grows
sevenfold worse.</p>

<p>There is something mysterious in the quick recovery of
women after child-birth. In a week and a half Mrs.
Laura was up again, well and flourishing, more beautiful
than ever, without any trace of all the suffering that she
had passed through—at least no outward traces. She
made a very charming picture with her son, when she occasionally
condescended to bend over his bed and pat his
cheek. Herman, who had already forgiven her for not
wanting to suckle their little Georg, was quite ready with
his admiration and chivalrous attentions to the young
mother.</p>

<p>And Laura accepted the homage calmly and unmoved.</p>

<p>Herman was still a very young man. He could not go
about for ever satisfied with the sensation of being a
happy father. There came a moment when he wanted to
receive some of the gracious caresses that were occasionally
bestowed on little Georg. He found something especially
bewitching in Laura’s new fulness, in the milky
whiteness of her skin, in her lazy, contented, catlike purring
after the storm she had passed through. But he was
far too sensitive to behave roughly. And there was something
in that purring that made him a little shy and
timid. He went about with a new and hesitating love as
if he were the fiancé of his own wife. He seized every
opportunity to pay her little attentions and to make her
little presents which she graciously deigned to accept.
Soon, Herman thought, I shall be a happy man again.
But Laura smiled and shrugged her shoulders. She was
playing with her tall fiancé. She gave him her little finger.
But when he suddenly wanted the whole hand she
shook her head and said “no,” a pitiless purring little
“no.”</p>

<p>Herman reproached himself. “I have not behaved
properly,” he thought. “I have been too rough and
hasty.” And then once more he played the chivalrous
fiancé for a while, and tried to get her out in the yacht
as he did last summer, but no! the lake amused her no
longer. Then he heaped amusements, jewels, and pretty
clothes upon her. She developed a studied coquetry and
opened out boldly in the sunshine.</p>

<p>Now it was their wedding day. Herman waited on her
with an enormous bunch of red roses; he appeared at
dinner in full dress and drank her health in champagne
and appealed to their sweet memories. At last he thought
she would be able to celebrate the anniversary of their
wedding. For a moment Laura seemed touched. But it
was only the champagne. At the last moment she turned
away from him, froze up, and talked of her delicate
health, of an uncontrollable anxiety, and held up the child
as a shield between herself and her husband. And then the
key grated in the bedroom door and Herman was shut out.</p>

<p>Laura sat down on the edge of her bed and slowly picked
Herman’s roses to pieces. She felt that she would never
again belong to him. It was not only cowardly selfishness
in face of the new demands of life. She was no
longer afraid, because her body had already forgotten.
No, she no longer wanted to belong to <i>him</i>. It was the
air itself here at old Hermansson’s Ekbacken that did not
suit her.</p>

<p>Laura flicked away the last rose petal. “He allowed me
to lock the door,” she thought, with a shrug of her shoulders,
“I am much stronger than he is.”</p>

<p>It is dangerous for a woman of Laura’s temperament to
begin to think like that.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Herman’s wounded pride did not rebel, he did not seek
any revenge. He was miserable, and in despair. He fell on
his knees and begged and entreated her, humiliated himself
before her. And then she despised him, grew tired
of him, and became cruel, deliberately cruel, so that afterwards
she was half surprised at herself.</p>

<p>Herman flew to drink and neglected his work. All ordinary
business was of course still in Lundbom’s hands
but Herman supervised the building on the slips. Now
he roamed about brooding and gloomy, gave orders and
counter-orders, began to quarrel with his men and then
suddenly he threw it all up and went down to stare at the
dump. Yes! that had been the result of his lawsuit. The
ground over which the town had acquired the shore rights
was his, but they had begun to fill in the lake in order
to build a quay. Barge after barge came along with
broken china and bricks, rubbish, and sweepings. The
evil smelling dump already stretched far out into the
lake. One could see it all from the windows of Ekbacken
and the comfort of the old place was gone. Herman
would stand there for hours with his hands in his pockets,
and reflect with a certain melancholy pleasure how the
town dumped its rubbish there under his very nose. Then
he would go inside and sit down and drink.</p>

<p>Once when he was half drunk he struck Laura, when
for the fiftieth time she cast the unsuccessful lawsuit in
his face. It was a feeble hesitating blow that only recoiled
on his own suffering heart. But Laura accepted
it with secret satisfaction. She had already begun to plan
how she might escape with the greatest possible profit
from this besieged fortress, whilst retaining all the honours
of war.</p>

<p>An unhappy marriage is the finest arsenal of egoism.
In the constant clash of two wills, selfishness sharpens its
edge, and in the suffering of an opponent tempers its steel.</p>

<p>Laura developed surprisingly fast. It was not long before
she understood with masterly cunning how to push
Herman to extremes and to make him compromise himself
seriously whilst she herself wisely kept quiet. It was she
who encouraged him to seek men’s company and to amuse
himself in town so that he should be spoken of as a reveller
and a drunkard. Finally it was she who in devious
ways reminded him that the world was full of women and
thus furtively placed in his hands an instrument of revenge
for her coldness. Otherwise Herman would never have
been able to make up his mind. He was, as it were, hypnotised
by her. Certainly it seemed as if it was directly
by her secret influence that he threw himself with the courage
of despair, and without a spark of desire, into the arms
of a waitress at the nearest public house. But all the
same, some childish hopes of making Laura jealous must
have seized him, for a woman’s voice began to ask for him
on the telephone and the poor boy tried to look provokingly
cheerful when he answered. These conversations on
the ’phone were followed by nights out which in their turn
were followed by forced explanations which Laura had
never asked for. Finally, in order to reveal the situation
quite clearly to her, he began to forget and leave lying
about short incriminating notes where Laura must find
them. She almost felt sorry for him. But anyhow she
took great care of the letters.</p>

<p>With a selection of these documents in her little silk
bag Laura now paid a visit to Selambshof. She went off
in a state of clear, cool exhilaration like a business man
who is about to settle up a difficult piece of business. It
seemed as if she wanted to gather strength amidst the old
surroundings before the decisive battle. But all this did
not prevent her from playing the martyr, a rôle that was
really more pleasant than she had anticipated. Even when
confronting Peter the Boss it had its satisfaction, though
she felt that he looked through her completely. Peter,
of course was disgusting. She was almost ashamed to
meet him in the streets in town. And all the same here
in his office she felt a strange affinity to him. Yes, it was
almost like quenching one’s thirst to look at his coarse
ugliness. And now she suddenly knew instinctively that
their wishes concerning Herman coincided.</p>

<p>Laura presented her husband’s compromising letters
with a tragic mien and she soon saw Peter’s eyes looking
at her with almost frightened admiration. “How the
deuce have you already brought him so far?” they seemed
to ask. But meanwhile he poured forth expressions of
good-natured and sentimental commiseration, in much the
same way as a dog dribbles when it catches sight of a
rich piece of food. But afterwards he showed his teeth:</p>

<p>“Valuable papers,” he muttered.</p>

<p>It came out so suddenly that Laura had some difficulty
in preserving her mien of martyrdom.</p>

<p>“Of course I can no longer live with Herman,” she
sighed.</p>

<p>“These letters are worth at least a hundred thousand,”
said Peter.</p>

<p>“I want to know how to set about getting a divorce. It’s
probably a dreadful business.”</p>

<p>Peter thought for a moment and then he brightened up:</p>

<p>“I will speak to Lundbom. He knows everything.”</p>

<p>“Lundbom?”</p>

<p>“Yes, Lundbom’s the man. He won’t suspect that it
concerns you two. He is absolutely blind to everything
personal.”</p>

<p>In spite of her martyr’s air Laura laughed low:</p>

<p>“Hum! That really would be rather funny.”</p>

<p>Peter had a free consultation with Lundbom at their next
card party. Lundbom saw no escape for the faithless
spouse; either hopeless and scandalous divorce proceedings
or a friendly settlement with a promise to surrender
the children and a handsome allowance.</p>

<p>Armed with this information Laura made a great scene
with Herman. Now all of a sudden she pretended to be
insulted, in despair, and mortally wounded in her wifely
dignity. She took the matter in such deadly earnest and
was so absorbed in the dramatic situation that she almost
began to believe in her feelings herself. Herman was
aghast. His first feeling was one of wild joy that she had
after all suffered, that she still loved him. This made
him forget that it was she herself who had placed his
revenge in his hands. But after her first outburst Laura
continued more calmly, with profound reproach in her
tone. Herman might have waited for her. A little patience
only and everything would perhaps have been
all right between them again. “You might have excused
a poor woman who has had to pass through so
much.”</p>

<p>Laura was magnificent when she said all this. Her
words fell like molten lead on Herman’s heart. He confessed
his helplessness, his despair at his indulgence in
spirits, and his disgust at his sorry folly with the other
woman, who had never given him a moment’s relief. He
was filled with a deep despair and remorse and begged
her forgiveness with tears streaming from his eyes.</p>

<p>It was the old, banal, and horrible struggle, in which
the result is a foregone conclusion, the struggle between
the one who loves and the one who is loved.</p>

<p>Laura was merely irritated by Herman’s tears. Did
she suspect that they sprang from sources which in her
had already dried up? Was that why her tone was so hard
and dry? When one cannot be Love one wishes to be Fate.
Oh! there was a secret luxury in standing there stiff and
unyielding:</p>

<p>“You have killed my love,” she said, “I want a divorce
and I shall take Georg. You have no right to refuse.”</p>

<p>Herman staggered as if he had been struck in the face.
The violence of the blow prevented him from seeing how
the whole thing had been pre-arranged.</p>

<p>He stood there gazing around him in front of an image
of stone and muttered alternate prayers and curses till at
last he ran out of the room, slamming the door behind
him.</p>

<p>But Herman could not get away from the fact that
Laura had everything beautifully arranged. She had public
opinion on her side, she had witnesses and letters. If
he wanted to escape the horrible divorce proceedings he
must accept her conditions. So he had to take the familiar
journey to Copenhagen and give up little Georg,
and mortgage Ekbacken heavily in order to purchase a
nice little annuity for his wife.</p>

<p>He stayed on in his lonely home with a bleeding hatred.
Sometimes he did not know whether it was hatred or love.
But Laura made a triumphant entry with baby and annuity
into an elegant little flat in Karlavägen, in the same
house as Stellan had his little two-roomed bachelor flat.
She was determined to enter society in order to amuse herself
and for this purpose Stellan’s brother officers and his
circle of fine friends might be invaluable for a divorced
young wife.</p>

<p>The very evening that Laura moved in, she went down to
see Stellan:</p>

<p>“I did not stay at the old lake,” she said, “and the little
idyl did not materialise.”</p>

<p>“No, no!” said Stellan. “Shall we play a game of
écarté?”</p>

<p>And they did.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">XI<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE SPANISH SAINT</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">One fine day in September Stellan Selamb, lieutenant
of the Göta Guards, was out at field manœuvres at
Lidingön with his platoon. They had already during
the cool and clear morning hours practised advancing
in open formation through the broken brushwood to the
right of the main road, when he gave over the command
to the sergeant and, consulting his map, began to climb a
steep hill path to make an attack on his own. After some
searching he found another new cross road which brought
him to a large, new and somewhat strange looking house,
which lay alone in the midst of the dense pine wood.</p>

<p>Stellan did not associate with architects and did not
usually pay much attention to houses. But he was accustomed
to safe old manor-houses which seemed to have
grown out of the ground where they were stood. This
house on the contrary looked as if it had fallen down from
the sky with its dazzling white walls broken up in a fantastic
way and its bright green roof! It was positively difficult
to tell whether it was meant for a temple, a sanatorium,
a museum or perhaps even an ordinary house. Anyhow
Stellan hammered the antique knocker against a huge black
church door densely studded with coarse nails.</p>

<p>A groom opened the door.</p>

<p>“The master is in bed, but I am to announce visitors all
the same.”</p>

<p>He disappeared but returned at once with the message
that if the lieutenant would look at the pictures for a moment
his master would receive him. Stellan walked through
several large rooms full of pictures, like picture galleries.</p>

<p>Some of them he knew from Percy’s old flat in town, but
most of them had probably been bought during his last
long journey abroad. There was both ancient and modern
art, Spanish and Dutch masters and some of the most modern
impressionists, but he could discover no trace of Percy’s
own canvases.</p>

<p>“Just like him,” Stellan thought, “they are of course relegated
to some old boxroom.”</p>

<p>At last the door into the bedroom was opened. There
lay “The China Doll.” It was the same thin, refined face
as before. And the same little smile, amiable, gentle and
slightly reserved. Only the blue of the eyes was not as cool
as before.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Percy, old man, I happened to have
field exercises in the neighbourhood and thought I would
have a peep at your new Tusculum.”</p>

<p>“O, I am so pleased when somebody is kind enough to
look in.”</p>

<p>Percy’s voice sounded strangely fragile. But Stellan did
not notice it. He was so accustomed to see Percy ill.
Having looked closely at the bedroom he suddenly burst
out laughing. It was black and white with a vaulted ceiling
and heavy carved oak furniture. The chairs seemed
completely taken up with their own ornament and would
no doubt have looked upon the back of anyone sitting down
on them as a desecration. Percy’s bed resembled most
nearly a catafalque and it was standing in an alcove which
looked like a chapel in the church of “The Third Kingdom.”</p>

<p>“I say, this looks rather as if it was prepared for the
eternal sleep,” Stellan exclaimed. “For a marble statue.”</p>

<p>Percy’s smile was a shade more wan.</p>

<p>“Yes, perhaps you are right....”</p>

<p>Stellan opened the door of a W. C. which the uninitiated
would have taken for some kind of confession box. He
suddenly grew furious and felt a desire to say something
indecent; he wisely kept it back however.</p>

<p>“Excuse me, Percy, old chap, but do you really feel at
home here?”</p>

<p>“No, I can’t say I do.”</p>

<p>“Well, then, why the devil do you have it in this style,
then?”</p>

<p>Percy looked at the ceiling of the alcove which was
painted all over with pentagrams and spirals.</p>

<p>“Well, my architect did it,” he muttered resignedly.
“He wanted it like this. And I dared not oppose him. It
is so difficult when you are not able to say that you cannot
afford it. It brings so many responsibilities. Do you
know, Stellan, I don’t think it is possible really to will
something, really to be something for your own sake if
you have lots of money.”</p>

<p>Stellan thought that if that was the difficulty he was ready
to ease him of his burden.</p>

<p>“Poor Percy,” he laughed sarcastically. “The prisoner
of wealth, for life.”</p>

<p>But then he remembered the refined little boy dressed in
white behind the gates at Stonehill. And it struck him that
there might perhaps be a bitter blighting truth in his exclamation.
And that Percy perhaps was a shade more serious
this time than usual. Stellan drummed, a little embarrassed,
on the rough carved block of black oak that constituted
the foot of the bed.</p>

<p>“I say, Percy, how are you really?”</p>

<p>Percy smiled an apologetic smile:</p>

<p>“Well, to be frank, I had a rather serious hæmorrhage
of the lungs a week and a half ago ... my chest has
always been weak, you know.”</p>

<p>For various reasons Stellan was horrified:</p>

<p>“But your footman did not tell me so. I had not the
slightest idea that....”</p>

<p>“Well, I don’t want to advertise my illness.”</p>

<p>“What does the medicine man say?”</p>

<p>“He shakes his head and says that I must lie quiet in bed
for the present, only lie quiet.... But dash it all, Stellan,
don’t take it so seriously. I myself am rather pleased.
I have never been anything but a dilettante. But this will
perhaps be my opportunity. A real danger! An honest
compulsion! Sometimes I feel as if I would really be able
to do something after all. Oh, there is a curious excitement
in the fever and the imminence of death.”</p>

<p>Stellan was just pondering how best in these circumstances
he might decorously prepare Percy for the comparative
relief to be derived from backing a bill for five thousand.
Then a head with fair straggling hair and broad
good-natured features peeped in through the door and disappeared
again with a smile of apology at the sight of Stellan.
It was the nurse. There were red spots in Percy’s
cheeks and his voice sounded worried and nervous:</p>

<p>“If you knew how I suffer from that woman,” he whispered.
“She is not at all unkind to me. On the contrary.
But I can’t stand people with that sort of stolid face. I
shiver when she touches me.”</p>

<p>“Why don’t you send her away?”</p>

<p>“No, it is so difficult. I can’t bring myself to do it.
Once she is here she has certain claims on me.”</p>

<p>Percy was silent for a moment, then he stretched out his
hand entreatingly:</p>

<p>“Perhaps you could help me, Stellan? Hasn’t the Army
some connection with the Red Cross? Oh, if you could
find me in some way a more bearable face!”</p>

<p>Stellan suddenly had an idea, a strange half-impossible
idea which, however, at bottom seemed to him to be curiously
charged with infinite possibilities. “Hedvig!” he
thought. “Hedvig!” He had to make an effort to recover
his normal, smooth and kindly tone.</p>

<p>“I could speak to my sister Hedvig,” he said. “She is a
nurse. But I tell you beforehand that she has a sombre and
strange temper. But her face is really something for an
artist to look upon.”</p>

<p>Percy became quite excited and was filled with touching
gratitude:</p>

<p>“A face, a temperament, a human being! Oh, how grateful
I should be to you!”</p>

<p>“Good, I’ll speak to her if she can get free. Anyhow
this grinning monster must be got rid of!”</p>

<p>With this Stellan took a warm good-bye. But at the door
he turned round with his most charming and unconcerned
expression.</p>

<p>“By the way, Percy, I am going about with a damned
little bill in my hip pocket. You would not like by any
chance to put your scrawl across it?”</p>

<p>“With pleasure, old boy, with pleasure.”</p>

<p>Stellan stepped whistling out of Hill’s villa and, in excellent
temper, resumed his command over his dusty and
perspiring platoon.</p>

<p>The same evening Stellan went to see Laura. He had
got into the habit of running up to her to talk things over
before he settled anything important.</p>

<p>Laura was dressing to go to the theatre. He helped her
to fasten her frock behind.</p>

<p>“Percy has had a hæmorrhage of the lungs and is dissatisfied
with his nurse. I offered to get Hedvig for him.
What do you think about it?”</p>

<p>“Poor Percy!”</p>

<p>“But how shall I persuade Hedvig?”</p>

<p>“You must talk about sacrifice, and give her an opportunity
to look long-suffering.”</p>

<p>Stellan rang up the Red Cross at once. There he was
given another telephone number and rang again. A weak
tremulous voice replied:</p>

<p>“Sister Hedvig? Yes, I’ll tell her.”</p>

<p>Hedvig came to the telephone. Stellan presented his
case. He made Percy as ill as possible and begged her to
sacrifice herself for their old friend. Hedvig’s distant
voice assumed a peculiarly hard resigned note.</p>

<p>“I don’t think I can.”</p>

<p>“But why?”</p>

<p>“Well, at least not at once.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>She lowered her voice:</p>

<p>“No, it won’t be ... all over here for another few
days....”</p>

<p>“All over!” Then a human being lay dying at the
other end of the wire! Stellan felt a cold shiver. He
looked at Laura, who sat there in low-cut evening frock
polishing her nails. He looked around him in the coquettish
little room. All over in a few days. All over! How
curiously Hedvig had said that. It was as if she had
wanted to force the thought of death on him like a tablespoonful
of medicine.</p>

<p>“Well, ... I may tell poor Percy that you will come
when you ... you are free?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose I must give up my idea of resting a
little.”</p>

<p>Then she rang off.</p>

<p>Stellan hung up the receiver.</p>

<p>“Yes, she will go to Percy as soon as her present patient
has had time to die. And it is Hedvig who is leading
such a life! Really I can’t understand it....”</p>

<p>Laura pursed up her lips whilst she pulled on her
glove. She looked unusually free from any sentimentality
at that moment.</p>

<p>“Hedvig is frightened,” she said.</p>

<p>Stellan felt nervous.</p>

<p>“Frightened? Damned funny way of being frightened.
What do you really mean?”</p>

<p>Laura’s answer came short, sharp and pleased. One
could see how she had worried about this matter and at
last found a satisfactory explanation:</p>

<p>“Who is it that runs about in the cemeteries at midnight?”
she said. “Precisely those who are afraid of ghosts.
Others have no business there.”</p>

<p>And then Mrs. Laura went to the theatre.</p>

<p>It was a fact that for a year and a half past Hedvig
had been a trained Red Cross nurse and that she was
already one of those who was sent to the more difficult
cases and that she herself desired it so.</p>

<p>To her fellow nurses she was an enigma. They felt
at once that she was not one of those simple good women
whose hearts call them to serve, care for, and struggle
against suffering and death. As they knew that she had
gone straight from her sister’s wedding to the hospital the
younger nurses at once concluded that Hedvig’s secret
was unrequited love, but the older and more experienced
nurses shook their heads.</p>

<p>The doctors also discussed Sister Hedvig. Men will
always discuss women such as Sister Hedvig. After long
discussions which were not free from criticism, though they
were supposed to be scientific, they too, turned to love as
explanation. And they of course protested against such
childish nonsense as women’s talk of an unhappy love.
A young psychiatrist had the word last. He said nothing
cynical. He would perhaps have done so ten years earlier.
But now cynicism was no longer the fashion—at least
among the psychiatrists—that was left to the surgeons
and other humbler craftsmen.</p>

<p>“Sister Hedvig,” the young doctor said, “is a very interesting
case. As a matter of fact she cannot look a
healthy man full in the eyes. But all the same she at
once chose the male division in the hospital. She simply
had to go there, she was really incapable of doing her duty
to the women patients. What else is that but a case of
timid, wounded, sickly eroticism slinking away to sick
people. She feels a secret relief in seeing men suffer and
die. She sacrifices them to Eros—probably by a religious
perversion of her feelings.”</p>

<p>Thus spoke the young doctor and did not observe his
own involuntary confession of having looked very deep
into Sister Hedvig’s eyes.</p>

<p>Perhaps there was something in what he said after all.
Though Laura had probably said the truest word. The
fundamental fact in Sister Hedvig’s nature was still fear.
And this fear had not, as in Peter’s case, spread over the
surface in the shape of pretended good nature and a magnificent
tissue of lies. No, in Hedvig it grew inwards in
the dark. And this growth she felt as an ever-present
gnawing ache in her inmost being. In the end this dark
groping fear had become so much a part of her that every
glimpse of happiness, liberty, spaciousness only seemed to
her a mockery. But her suffering was terrible just because
of its indefiniteness, its formlessness and its teeming
darkness. Under these circumstances she must have felt
every really definite cause for fear as a sort of relief, a
release. He who sees, need not brood. That was why
the sick bed and the death bed held such a strange attraction
for her. That was why her expression would
sometimes reveal such curious relief in the presence of
the most awful struggles. That was why she closed the
eyes of the dead with such pale and still solemnity. She
herself interpreted it as the brief precious peace of heart
before God after service and sacrifice. During her training
as a nurse Sister Hedvig had turned more and more
away from the world and relapsed into religious gloom.
She walked about like a living protest against every form
of levity and vanity.</p>

<p>And now she stood on a cold and clear September day
by Percy’s bed at Hill Villa.</p>

<p>Percy stared at her dark eyes and pale cheeks. It was
really an unusual pallor. One did not know whether
she burned or froze.</p>

<p>“And so you are Stellan’s sister,” he muttered. “We
must have met, as children at least, when I was still living
at Stonehill. Strange that I did not notice your looks,
then.”</p>

<p>“I have always kept apart,” she answered coldly.</p>

<p>Percy smiled a little apologetic smile.</p>

<p>“But now ... now Sister Hedvig comes here and
wants to help me, poor wretch....”</p>

<p>“I will try to do my duty,” answered Sister Hedvig.</p>

<p>Percy sank back with half-closed eyes on his pillow.
It suddenly seemed to him inconceivable that a woman
with such a face should witness his frailty, help him to
change his shirt and reach him the basin. “I shall have
a high temperature this evening,” he thought. “But that
doesn’t matter. I shan’t be bored anyhow.”</p>

<p>Hedvig left the sick room on some errand. When she
came back Percy had already managed to allot a place
to the newcomer in his world.</p>

<p>“Now I have got it,” he said contentedly. “Sister Hedvig
is a Spanish saint. Yes? I have seen Sister Hedvig
hanging on a church wall in Toledo.... Or perhaps
it is something Byzantine,” he added thoughtfully. “Yes,
you would look well in a mosaic ... on a ground of
gold ... or perhaps a cold greenish blue....”</p>

<p>Sister Hedvig received this speech, which was to her
partly incomprehensible, partly offensive, in silence. She
had never before met a dilettante patron of art of Percy’s
type. She was highly distressed and confused by the whole
atmosphere of Hill’s villa. She walked with lowered
eyes and frightened steps through these rooms in which
the walls were covered with impudently brilliant coloured
pictures. I won’t even mention all the nudes that met her
gaze everywhere without trace of shame, in strange and
challenging forms. To her the nude was now exclusively
associated with sickness and death. She could not and
would not think of it except under fever cooling bandages
or under the surgeon’s knife. And here it insolently
glowed with health or made a pretence of harmony and
peace which could be nothing but a delusion and abomination.
It was incredible. But that was not all. Even
from the landscapes it seemed to her that there emanated
something of sin and danger. The mixture of French impressionism
and national lyricism of that time, which nowadays
appears to us so harmless and innocent, still seemed
then alarmingly modern, and Hedvig also found in these
pictures a defiant worldliness quite different from that of
the old brown-gravy landscapes which hung on the walls
at Selambshof. Art with its flavour of sin and damnation
pursued her even into the sickroom. Opposite the bed
there hung a picture of a handsome naked youth who
smiled an ecstatic smile though his breast was pierced
with cruel arrows.</p>

<p>“Isn’t he beautiful, Saint Sebastian?” said Percy proudly.
“I discovered him in Naples in an old Jew’s shop. The
painter is unknown, but you can see at once that he must
have been a contemporary of Bernini. The typical mixture
of sensualism and ecstasy of the baroque style cannot
be mistaken. My Sebastian is a male cousin of Saint
Teresa of the Santa Maria della Vittoria in Rome. His
breast is full of the arrows with which the beautiful angel
threatens her. One does not quite know if it is the arrows
of love or of martyrdom.”</p>

<p>Sister Hedvig looked at the floor and shook her head:</p>

<p>“I don’t understand anything of all this. And I don’t
want to understand it either. I am not here to look at pictures.”</p>

<p>In this strange world she had come into, Percy Hill’s
illness was somehow the only thing she had to hold on to
and she felt hurt that he did not take it seriously enough.</p>

<p>Percy looked quite frightened.</p>

<p>“Dear, dear, surely I have not hurt you, Sister, in any
way. I didn’t mean to at all.” Then he added with a
pale, little smile: “I must talk about art, you see, otherwise
my temperature will rise....”</p>

<p>She did not give an answering smile.</p>

<p>She continued all along to be stiff, silent and suspicious.
In his weakness and helplessness he suffered at first from
this lack of sympathy. If he had been an artist he would
perhaps have felt a genuine hatred for her. But he was
only a dilettante and an amateur, so he not only suffered
it, but even began to be attracted by the gloomy and rigid
creature as he might have been by some old sombre family
treasure which had been hidden from the world in some
dusty and sunless corner. Yes, exactly like some gloomy
treasure which dumbly reminds us of the dreams and
passions of a bygone age. And which is not for sale
amongst the rubbish of today.</p>

<p>Thus far had Percy come after a week’s dilettante analysis
of Hedvig’s personality. By this time he had entirely
ceased to speak about art. But one evening when
she stood by the window staring out on the hard and wind-swept
autumn sky the expression on her face suddenly
brought an idea into his head:</p>

<p>“Sister Hedvig,” he exclaimed, “won’t you read to me a
little out of the Old Testament?”</p>

<p>And he rang for a footman and sent him for a new illustrated
edition de luxe bible from the library.</p>

<p>But Hedvig refused at first. She was afraid of the
echo from the luxurious rooms with their works of art just
outside. She was afraid of his vain and scoffing secret
thoughts. But Percy was persistent. He told her about
his childhood when his mother would sometimes read aloud
to him out of the school bible in the evenings. It sounded
almost as if in his strange way he took the scriptures
seriously. And at last to her own surprise Hedvig gave
in. His face lit up:</p>

<p>“Take Deborah’s song,” he begged, as keen as any child
to hear its favourite story.</p>

<p>And Hedvig read in a low voice of Deborah who led the
chiefs of Israel, whose soul went forth in strength. But
there was something too mournful and cold in her voice.
Percy’s sensitive ear suspected old Kristin’s influence, the
deep-rooted fatalism of the people. He was however afraid
of hurting her and let her finish the chapter.</p>

<p>“That is too hard and bright,” he muttered. “There is
too much victory for us two, Sister Hedvig. Take something
more difficult and more gloomy.”</p>

<p>And Hedvig read on. She did not know why herself.
Perhaps she had a feeling in her inmost heart that he in
some way seemed to understand her. But this no longer
alarmed her shyness. He was so weak and helpless. He
lay there in the shadow of death. He would never rise up
and boldly cast her secrets into her face. So she read on.
She read of how Jehu annihilated the whole house of Ahab
and of how the dogs ate Jezebel on the fields of Jezreel.
And she read in the book of Job how man, born of woman,
lives a short time full of care, how his illness rises up
and bears witness against him and over his eyes rests the
shadow of death. To the grave he must say: “Thou art
my father,” and to the worms of putrefaction: “my mother,
my sister.” And she read in Isaiah about the earth
which was consumed by the curse, how the sap of the vine
sorrowed and the vine languished. Plaintive cries are heard
over the wine and all joy is like a sun that has set—all joy
of the earth has disappeared. Dangers and pitfalls and
snares lie in wait for you, inhabitants of earth! Earth
is utterly broken down, and shall reel like a drunkard, it
shall be clean dissolved.</p>

<p>Percy lay quite silent and looked at Hedvig. He followed
unconsciously the movements of her lips. This is absolutely
sincere, he thought. She is a being from the past.
She belongs to an age when fear formed a great part of human
life. It is strange to hear the Jewish cast of thought
from her lips, persistent as the groans of a sufferer, bitter as
the knowledge which is hammered into you by blow upon
blow. Only the pressure of the world and sad experience....</p>

<p>And he felt a great joy as if he had succeeded at last in
finding a really precious antique for his collection.</p>

<p>It was getting dusk and Hedvig did not see the print any
longer. She put down the heavy book. She had a sudden
feeling of relief as after confession. Though faint and
transient it was nevertheless something unique in her life.</p>

<p>But already the next morning Hedvig felt a dull
anxiety at having given herself up. And she was more curt
and silent and reserved than usual.</p>

<p>In November Percy grew somewhat worse. He was often
troubled by coughs and his temperature curve showed a
tendency to rise. The doctor shook his head when his
patient spoke of going to Switzerland.</p>

<p>“Not before the spring,” he said. “Now we must be
good and keep quiet and drink milk.”</p>

<p>Percy did not like the doctor very much. He represented
the prose side of his illness. But Hedvig
looked meaningly at her patient when the doctor had gone.
She looked at him as if he had been a child who had wanted
to run away from school but who had been brought to
reason. She had grown with his weakness. She nursed
him diligently and carefully but with an expression of
solemn superiority. “There, you see,” she seemed to say,
“after all, your vanity won’t help you. Of what use now is
your art and your worldly pride?”</p>

<p>Percy noticed it, but he did not grow angry. He was
not of that kind. He also derived a sort of pleasure from
this new development. Hedvig no longer seemed to him a
dark and rare treasure that he had added to his collections.
And he loved to droop away in sight of that sombre and
stern virgin face. Even pain could give him a secret
pleasure.</p>

<p>“This is an auto-da-fé,” he muttered once in delirium.
“I can see the sparks in the pupils of Sister Hedvig’s eyes.
They are roasting me with slow fire because I have doubted
the Virgin Mary’s immaculate conception.”</p>

<p>And then he smiled his mysterious, derisive, little smile,
which was so full of weakness and courage. But in the
midst of the smile there came a sudden fit of coughing accompanied
by blood and froth between his pale lips, blood
on the lace of sheets and pillows. His wound had broken
out again. He had another attack of hæmorrhage of the
lungs.</p>

<p>Percy’s face grew still paler and thinner. It was as if he
had shrunk before the cold breath of Death’s wings. But
he was never a coward in his suffering. There was never a
trace of panic.</p>

<p>But his weakness was such that Sister Hedvig found no
occasion for any anxious, defensive suspicion. She was
afraid of life, but he no longer belonged to life, she thought.
A dying man she dared to approach. Confronted by death
she dared to be woman. Yes, now the shy, severe Sister
Hedvig could be quite tender and open. Turning away a
little, she could softly stroke his hand as it lay there so
white on the eiderdown. Yes, sometimes she gave him
little stealthy caresses that had no tomorrow. It was her
woman’s soul that lay half suffocated beneath her fear,
which now ventured to make little hesitating excursions in
the twilight of death.</p>

<p>Thus had Sister Hedvig by the force of circumstances
come quite near to one who was the complete opposite to
herself. We witness here the strange meeting of two
persons, one of whom is sterile from fear and the other
from lack of fear. Percy Hill’s life showed a strange
blunting of the faculty of fear. He had always lacked the
spur to action and to life that fear provides. Hence his
dilettantism. He lived on his money without knowing
anything about the hard struggle which had brought
it together. He loved art without being capable of diving
beneath the work itself to the deep disquietude
which had created it. He never went beyond the enjoyment
of it. His own creative work had only been a form
of enjoyment. That is why he had never created anything
new. He knew it himself, but he had not the strength to
feel any real anguish over it, that anguish which might
perhaps in the end have opened the gates to the mysterious
creative world.</p>

<p>But now in the face of death this deficiency seemed like
a splendid liberation. It is a fact that death does not come
to us as a stranger. It grows coarser or more delicate and
refined according to our natures. Percy’s death must of
course be frail and subtle and with an element of incurable
dilettantism.</p>

<p>“You must not think, Sister Hedvig,” he whispered with
a little smile of ineradicable irony vanquishing his weakness,
“that this is anything very extraordinary to me.
There is really not very much that will be lost with me.
I have always stood rather well with death. I cannot remember
that I have ever fought against it even in the
thoughts of my boyhood. My mother was so unnaturally
afraid for me that I, by mere reaction, grew more and more
indifferent. At first I hoped perhaps a little to get something
from my illness. I hoped that the fever and the fine
restlessness would yield me something. So much beauty
has been born of consumption. Perhaps I still hope.
But not so feverishly that it consumes me.” In vain Hedvig
told herself that this was false blasphemy. In vain she
entrenched herself behind her religious feelings. She felt
that he did not lie. To her it seemed monstrous that a
person could speak so without lying. An exquisite coolness
descended upon her soul. Her own dark fear of life
shrank in this unusual light. There were moments of a
glorious release of the usual tension within her. She felt
something almost resembling gratitude and tenderness.
She need not hide anything, nor pretend, nor creep away.
All this had no tomorrow. He could not betray her, nor
trample upon her. He would soon die.</p>

<p>Thus Hedvig went about prepared to close his eyes, to
mourn for him and keep him as a beautiful memory which
nobody in the world would know of, or could deprive her
of.</p>

<p>Already she was depositing him, the secret treasure of the
poor, with Death.</p>

<p>But now the unexpected happened, Percy Hill did not
die. On the contrary he began to pick up a little in the
spring. In the beginning it almost looked as if he himself
had been a little embarrassed and ashamed at this
turn of events.</p>

<p>“I have never done what was expected of me,” he said.
“I never finished my pictures. And of course, I did not
see this thing through either....”</p>

<p>But there was all the same something new in his tone.
These phrases no longer rang true as formerly.</p>

<p>You may have been nearly run over by a tram and it is
only afterwards when you are safe on the pavement that
you begin to be frightened and feel the threat of death
within you. As his temperature fell there rose a new restlessness
in Percy Hill. He began anxiously to avoid talking
of death. It seemed as if he had been ashamed of his
weakness. He did all he could to appear as well as
possible. It was only with difficulty that he was kept in bed.
He grew impatient at the constant relapses of the early
spring into cold and miserable weather. He insisted on going
somewhere where there was plenty of sunshine. He
had suddenly been seized by a violent zest for life.</p>

<p>Yes, and now Percy Hill felt for the first time a certain
fear of death. A mysterious change had taken place in
him. He had been inoculated with some of Sister
Hedvig’s poisons in the same way as she had been with his.</p>

<p>How did she behave for her part now when he slowly
began to slip out of the shadow of death under which they
had come so near to each other? Did she draw back into
her shell? Did she become the closed garden or the sealed
spring once again? It might seem so. She had an expression
which seemed to command him to forget what had
passed between them. That furtive tenderness, whose
shoots seemed only to thrive in darkness, ceased. But
the seal was all the same broken. Her reserve and shyness
could never be exactly the same again, they had no longer
the true depth. There rather arose moments of a certain
banal and everyday embarrassment between them. Percy
clearly suffered in accepting her assistance. He shaved
himself every day and became particular about his appearance.
Certain situations galled him as being lowering
to his masculine pride. It seemed as if he had to overcome
a certain reluctance each time he had to call her
“Sister Hedvig.” Without saying anything Hedvig acquired
the habit of knocking at his door before she entered
the room. She did this with a strange feeling half of
bitterness and half of satisfaction. Her suspiciousness
found the change in Percy’s manners wounding. But in
her inmost heart she proudly understood what it really
meant. Officially she was as much a stranger in his world
as ever before. But it was a fact that she no longer walked
through the picture galleries with lowered eyes. Though
she did not admit it to herself, certain echoes of what he
had said concerning pleasure and beauty being something
self-evident would crop up in her thoughts. After a
youth which had been haunted by the ghost of poverty, she
sometimes felt a shiver run through her in the presence of
this magnificent house and of all she had heard about his
wealth. It was really something hitherto hidden and
downtrodden in her Selamb soul that very cautiously
raised its head.</p>

<p>From this moment Sister Hedvig began to develop a
certain coquetry. If she read a silent question in Percy
Hill’s eyes she purposely appeared dull and impenetrable.
Her instinct told her that a man like him was attracted
by the unknown, by what was unlike himself. Consequently
she carefully avoided betraying anything of the change
that had taken place in herself. She well remembered
what he had said about the image of the saint in Toledo
and about the sparks from the stake in her eyes. So she
now appeared really pale and dark and Spanish. And
with secret joy she saw that the Spanish effect did its work.
The cool and mocking light had disappeared from Percy’s
eyes. Instead there sometimes came a shy and nervous
look of supplication. He was clearly in love with her.</p>

<p>Then Stellan called, just at the right moment. He
came from what seemed to have been a family council
of the Selambs. Curiosity had been stimulated enormously
of late. Percy was so rich that you could not help
reflecting. Nothing was impossible. It might mean marriage,
it might mean a bequest in his will. One did not
know if he was going to live or die. Neither Peter nor
Laura knew Percy Hill enough to call on him. Hedvig
herself was impossible to approach. Laura had tried
over the telephone but had, of course, got nothing out
of her.</p>

<p>Then at last Stellan came home from a command in
Norrland and was sent out to Hill’s villa at once to reconnoitre.</p>

<p>It was a clear, warm, sunny day after a long spell of
cruelly disagreeable spring weather. Stellan had a strange
gift of always bringing fine weather. Percy was sitting up
in an easy chair in front of an open window facing south.
Sister Hedvig had slipped away into the darkest corner
with some kind of Christian needlework. Such April
sunshine was still too much for her. Stellan had ridden
out. He was walking up and down the room lightly
striking his riding boots with his whip. At first he had
been shocked for a moment by Percy’s wasted look, but now
he was already praising his rapid recovery. He always
talked a lot, Stellan. He had a peculiar tendency to dwell
with a mixture of envy and admiration on Percy’s precious
art treasures, on his admirable patronage of art and his
subtle intelligence. He also returned several times by sly,
roundabout ways to the subject of wealth, and money.</p>

<p>“Yes, because Percy is the sort of man who must be
reminded that he can get whatever he wants,” he said.
“He will forget to keep alive if you don’t remind him.”</p>

<p>Stellan was insistent as if at one and the same time
he had wished to free Percy from his lack of self-confidence
and rouse him from the lassitude of his illness. Percy
listened with his eyes half-closed. Of course he did not
take all this seriously. But in his present frame of mind
he enjoyed Stellan’s talk, all the same. It blended with
the clear strong sunshine and seemed to hold out something
like a promise of life.</p>

<p>Hedvig in her corner also listened to this glorification of
Percy. She suspected that Stellan was also addressing
himself to her. When he returned to the subject of money
and to the wonderful opportunities of becoming rich she
looked down at her work and continued her sewing with
feverish haste. She detested him and yet she wanted to
hear more. She grew hot and cold by turns. To save her
life she could not have looked up.</p>

<p>But Stellan walked up and down between the two and
observed them with cool and cheerful curiosity. He felt
strangely elated. And then his black horse neighed outside
by the gate post, and a loud and festive flourish of trumpets
like a call to battle was sounded in the clear, radiant spring
air. Stellan took a hasty farewell. Hedvig accompanied
him to the front door. She was astonished at herself for
doing so. But there was a certain pleasure in walking
through these magnificent rooms by the side of Stellan
with his jingling spurs. Out on the stairs she looked
into his eyes for a moment. There was a bitter and savage
triumph in her glance. Stellan pointed to his horse.</p>

<p>“Winnings at cards,” he said. “I have christened him
the ‘Ace of Spades.’ Fine, isn’t he?”</p>

<p>And then he jumped into the saddle and trotted away
down the hill.</p>

<p>Hedvig slowly returned to Percy, who was still sitting
among his cushions in the sunshine.</p>

<p>Stellan’s visit had, as it were, aired out the place after
the long confined winter. Yes, they had lived as in a
monastery cell. And now the horseman on his black
steed had come like a messenger from the great, cold
exciting world beyond. And there was relief in that.</p>

<p>“As soon as I can I am going away,” said Percy, “first to
Meran and then to Mentone.”</p>

<p>He looked at Sister Hedvig, who had resumed her
sewing. She was sewing very fast and did not answer.
Percy spoke again with forced ease:</p>

<p>“Are you coming with me, Sister Hedvig?”</p>

<p>She shrugged her shoulders without looking up:</p>

<p>“There are other sick people who need me....”</p>

<p>“I mean will Sister ... will Hedvig come with me
as my wife?”</p>

<p>Hedvig shrank further into her corner. Her wretched
fear once again took possession of her and thrust her into
the deepest shadows.</p>

<p>“No, ... I can’t, ... I will never be anybody’s
wife....”</p>

<p>For a moment Percy looked at her with anxious amazement.
He had lately done his utmost to appear as well
and as manly as possible, and then the poor fellow all of
a sudden completely changed his pose.</p>

<p>“But I ... I am not a real man, Hedvig. Not now,
at least. I am only a convalescent. And I don’t know if
I can live without your presence.”</p>

<p>She was white and her hands trembled.</p>

<p>“If we can go on living as we have done before,
then....”</p>

<p>“Yes, till I am well ... and you yourself want it
otherwise....”</p>

<p>His voice sounded both sad and happy. He beckoned
Hedvig towards him:</p>

<p>“O, we both need a lot of sunshine, you and I, Hedvig,”
he muttered.</p>

<p>And he took her hand in his uplifted hands with an expression
of reverence. It was as if he also wished to touch
her beautiful oval face with his fingers. Then he sank
back against his cushions and breathed heavily, oppressed
by his emotions. Hedvig had to lead him back to bed.</p>

<p>“Our Eros,” whispered Percy pointing at Saint Sebastian,
“who smiles though his breast is full of arrows.”</p>

<p>Such was Hedvig Selamb’s engagement. She would have
shrunk back frightened from complete matrimony. She
dared to go half way. It really was a typical Selamb insurance
against the risks both of loneliness and poverty and
the demands of life. But before the dawn of the next day
she had already convinced herself that she was making a
great sacrifice.</p>

<p>The banns had been read for the second time and Percy
was expected on a visit to Selambshof, in which he had not
set his foot since he was a child. Hedvig had gone there
at the last moment. She could of course not stay on alone
in the house of her fiancé.</p>

<p>The Selambs were sitting in front of a fire in the hall.
The main building had stood empty the whole of the winter,
since Peter nowadays lived in the bailiff’s wing. The hall
was like a cave. The winter cold still clung to the walls,
though it was May. But that did not seem to disturb the
Selambs. They whispered in eager tones and were agreeably
excited as if by an interesting game of cards. Now
and then they threw pitying, envious, and secretly admiring
side-glances at Hedvig, who was standing by one of the
windows. Hedvig was dressed in a plain black frock. She
was standing there alone, silent, cold, with a severe and
haughty expression on her face. She looked down the
avenue by which Percy would arrive. Yes, here her fiancé
was about to drive up in a great fine carriage, round the
very same bend as did Brundin once upon a time in his little
green dog-cart. And during dinner she would sit silent and
erect by his side and scarcely taste her food. The silence
would spread around her so that not even Laura would dare
to begin her empty, worldly chatter. There would be a real
contrast to all the shouts and hurrahs of her own unfortunate
wedding. And it would be the last time Percy would
appear at Selambshof. Yes, Hedvig had decided to have a
quiet wedding ceremony without her relations. That would
be the most dignified way. She had no further use for all
these people out here. She would go abroad and leave
it all behind.</p>

<p>Hedvig thought of all this as she stood at the window.
The shadow of a smile passed now and again over her severe
red lips. Wonderfully sweet contentment suffused her
whole being. She trampled on her old fear, loneliness,
and humiliation, and felt as if she had truly her old fear
under her foot. But she could not trample it to death.
One does not trample a shadow to death. It can only be
killed by light....</p>

<p>Then Percy Hill came driving up to the steps. He remained
for a moment sitting in the open carriage looking
up at the high, gloomy walls of Selambshof. It was impossible
for him to escape a feeling of discomfort in the
presence of this sham feudal architecture, this suburban
gothic which did not even take itself seriously. “Well,”
he thought, “we are going away from all this.”</p>

<p>He entered. He moved slowly and looked very pale and
thin in his black morning coat. Nobody could help seeing
that he had been in the shadow of death. For a moment
he seemed to shrink from the wintry air inside. But his
glance brightened when he caught sight of Hedvig’s frock.
He had been afraid to see her without her nurse’s uniform.
Her simple black frock seemed to him an expression of
tactfulness. He kissed Hedvig’s hand and greeted Laura
and Stellan. Then it was Peter’s turn. Percy had had no
communication with him for many years. Peter’s gross
figure startled him somewhat. He offered his transparent
fingers with half-closed eyes and withdrew them again
quickly with a little embarrassed smile.</p>

<p>Nobody said much. Laura pulled her shawl more closely
over her shoulders and even Stellan seemed somewhat ill
at ease.</p>

<p>Then Hedvig led Percy with an absent-minded expression
to the wedding presents which were laid out on a table
by the window. There were crystal vases and bowls in the
taste of the day—all eloquent of decent, commonplace
domestic life. Hedvig walked away. Percy looked at the
floor.</p>

<p>“They are all overtaxing my nerves,” he thought. “Such
meaningless ugliness!” He had to make a real effort to
realise that this was not a deliberate mockery of their
marriage, but merely a sacrifice to the conventionalities.
At last he began to thank everybody very eagerly and politely
to right and left on behalf of himself and Hedvig.</p>

<p>It was Stellan who saved the situation. He took Percy’s
arm.</p>

<p>“Now I must show you round a little in this owls’ nest,”
he said, in a tone of command that had something engagingly
impersonal in it. “Selambshof was not conjured up
in a day like your palace. It is as old as sin, though it was
unfortunately rebuilt and spoilt in the process sometime
in the ’fifties.”</p>

<p>Percy stopped in the dining-room in front of old Enoch’s
portrait. Suddenly he looked quite relieved and was delighted:</p>

<p>“This is very interesting!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>“Do you think so? It’s our grandfather. An old devil,
between ourselves.”</p>

<p>Percy climbed up and examined the signature in the
corner:</p>

<p>“Just fancy, a Tervillius! But yet not quite like him.
He never achieved such rapid execution elsewhere. What
swift, cruel characterisation! And he is otherwise so extremely
conscientious.”</p>

<p>“Well, he is said to have had his reasons for not loving
old Enoch. It cannot have been very pleasant to owe him
money.”</p>

<p>“So it is the inspiration of hatred! Well, there are worse
inspirations.”</p>

<p>“Our dear grandfather was apparently not at all displeased
with the caricature, though for certain reasons it
cannot have been very agreeable to him. I suppose you
know that Tervillius committed suicide ... just a few days
after he had finished out here?”</p>

<p>“Oh, so this is his last work ... an anathema....”</p>

<p>Hedvig had silently stolen up to them and stood there
staring Old Hök in the eyes whilst she listened greedily
to each word that was uttered. Percy pushed his arm
smilingly under Hedvig’s and eagerly solicited the condescension
of his Spanish saint:</p>

<p>“Fancy the last masterpiece of a distinguished artist!
And quite unknown to the critics. That is most remarkable.”</p>

<p>Peter had also come up to the picture: “Is the old
fellow really worth something?” he wondered.</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand, at least. It’s a pity it is a family
portrait as one does not dare to make an offer for
it.”</p>

<p>The eyes of the Selambs lit up. They evidently regarded
their grandfather with a new interest.</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand for the curse,” mumbled Hedvig with
a shrug of her shoulders.</p>

<p>“The old man gave five hundred,” said Peter. “I have
seen an old receipt. He was always a good business man.”</p>

<p>“Aren’t you afraid to marry into old Enoch’s family?”
cried Laura with a voice that had suddenly become quite
gay. “Just look how like him I am.” And with comic
eagerness she imitated his hard looks and pulled down the
corners of her mouth.</p>

<p>But Percy looked searchingly round the circle of faces
and his look rested with an expression of admiration on
Hedvig:</p>

<p>“Isn’t the likeness all the same most striking in Hedvig?”
he said lightly.</p>

<p>Not for a second did he shrink from the thought that
she was of the same blood as the old usurer against whom
the soul of a hunted and despairing artist had exploded
its hatred before his eyes.</p>

<p>He was a dilettante, Percy Hill.</p>

<p>After the early dinner Percy had to return home at once.
And Hedvig did not want to stay with the others round
the coffee table.</p>

<p>“Now, I will leave you, so that you can discuss us more
freely,” she said.</p>

<p>Hedvig was going up to her room. She had not gone
many steps up the creaking stairs before she heard the
dammed-up floods of talk of her sister and brothers released.
Silently as a ghost she crept back to the door and listened.
First she heard Stellan’s voice:</p>

<p>“The devil take me if I can understand Hedvig. I really
did not think her capable of this.”</p>

<p>“Indeed,” interposed Laura, “it was exactly what I expected.
She used to sneak things when she was small.”</p>

<p>Then it was Stellan again:</p>

<p>“Poor Percy is a decent fellow anyhow. He only wants
to get away as quickly as possible in secret. I understand
that they don’t want us to be present at the wedding.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Laura, “we are sure to meet again soon—on
another solemn occasion.”</p>

<p>Then one heard Peter bang his knees together. “Yes,
yes, the money will last longer than the husband. She
will soon have pots of money.”</p>

<p>Hedvig leaned against the doorpost with closed eyes. She
felt cold and stiff all over. Her disgust at the people in
there who so impudently and blindly defiled her sacrifice
froze her blood. And all the same she could not tear herself
away from her listening post. And all the same she
devoured greedily every word of her sister and brothers.
In her innermost heart there was a wild frightened joy to
hear how rich she was going to be.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">XII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">PETER CASTS OUT MAJÄNGEN AND BRINGS HOME EKBACKEN</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Peter the Boss had begun to frequent the observatory
again. But it was not in order to watch the workers
at Selambshof as old Enoch had done. No, the observatory
was rather the scene of his economic dreams.
With the help of the old marine glass he now and then
peeped into the future. On the blackened billiard marker
he had a few calculations, for the airiness of which quickly
wiped-off chalk was a better medium than paper and ink.
It was a sort of game. But behind the game lurked a serious
purpose. Peter the Boss longed more and more to rise
above the humble rank of an ordinary farm-bailiff. It is
true that he had been called “Director” ever since the estate
had been transformed into a limited company after the
death of their father, but the change of the title did not alter
the facts. Peter was tired of his elementary tricks in buying
and selling and they had now become a matter of mechanical
routine with him. They were simply a means of
obtaining the commission which his sisters and brothers
were too mean to pay him. Of course he did earn a certain
amount of money. Yes, the amount increased quite nicely,
quite nicely. But all the same he felt the restlessness of
one who is conscientiously capable of greater things. He
had half-frightened, dizzying visions of profits of millions.
The future teemed with possibilities which confused and
distracted him during his day’s work. He had to climb up
to a high place in order to survey the situation. And that
place was the observatory.</p>

<p>Peter used to begin his observations from the west window.
At first he pretended to be there for the sake of the
fine view. He was coquetting, as it were, with his shy
hopes. Contemptuously his look passed over treeless and
insignificant Ryssvik. But further away he beheld Trefvinge
beyond the fine fishing water and densely wooded forests.
Well grown and no mortgages! Fancy what a lot of money
could be got out of that estate. Peter could not help making
calculations. It was, of course, mere fancy, idle
fancies ... though perhaps Stellan might ... he had
flirted rather freely with Elvira Lähnfeldt at Laura’s
wedding ... but probably it meant nothing.</p>

<p>With a little sigh Peter stepped to the south window.
Here he at once approached a little nearer to reality. Here
lay Kolsnäs and it looked quite different, with big bare
patches in the forest, and bushes and felled trees and
melancholy seed-pines on the horizon. Yes, yes, cash would
be wanted there when the old lady died and Lieutenant
Manne von Strelert began to sow his wild oats. Lots of
timber had been cut down and the estate was mortgaged,
but there was still lots more to take. Manne was a deuced
decent fellow, anyhow, and Peter would not have minded
making him a little loan now and then. He had a distinct
sensation of pressing a bundle of notes into the Lieutenant’s
hand and receiving a nice little I.O.U. in return, which
would give him a hold over a corner of Kolsnäs.</p>

<p>Yes, those were his dreams. Unfortunately Peter had
nothing to spare for Kolsnäs now. Stellan immediately
consumed the cash Peter could lay hands on. He was awful,
Stellan. Already more than half of his shares lay as security
in Peter’s drawer.</p>

<p>At last Peter came to the east window. From here he
had a fine view nowadays since he had felled a couple of
enormous aspens on the slope behind the avenue. He did
that because of Ekbacken. Now he could see both the yard
and the sawmill and a bit of the town behind. Peter could
not help interesting himself in Ekbacken. Herman had
avoided him since the divorce. It was not so easy either
to enter into conversation with old Lundbom now that his
trusteeship had lapsed. So Peter had to be content with
what he could discover with the help of his glasses, though
that was quite a lot. He saw, for instance, that the proud
yacht building Herman had spoken of had completely
ceased. There was never more than one yacht and that
was Herman’s own “Laura.” Well, the name was of course
painted out, which really was not to be wondered at.
That tall figure over there was Herman himself. He would
stroll out onto the pier and sit for hours with a glass and a
bottle beside him on the green seat. Sometimes he went
out sailing for a couple of days and then the boat would
lie rubbing against the pier with sails up whilst half the pier
was littered with empty bottles handed up out of the
boat.</p>

<p>Peter shook his head in joyful concern:</p>

<p>“Poor boy,” he muttered, “breakers after a storm. This
will never end well.”</p>

<p>Neither did it.</p>

<p>Peter soon saw that activity in the shipyard decreased.
The repairing slips began to be empty for long periods,
the capstan struggled with its long arms as if it were begging
for help from all the four quarters of the compass and the
crane hung helpless over the water as if in expectation of
an inevitable fall. And the few workmen visible were
mostly loitering or sitting smoking on the sly between the
weathering stacks of boards round the sawmill.</p>

<p>Peter was quite touched at this decay. He felt an agreeable
compassion for the excellent Herman. It was not his
fault that all this misery might turn out to his advantage and
to that of Selambshof. For if the resistance of Ekbacken
was broken then Herman could no longer foolishly oppose
the advance of the town. And in that fact Peter secretly
already saw his great opportunity.</p>

<p>Peter had felt a profound emotion when for the first
time he fully realised that the town over there was smoking
and sweating in order to increase the value of Selambshof.
From that moment he began to think that the smell from
the glue works on the other side of the lake was rather
pleasant. The glue works was the first outpost of the town
and with one blow it had broken the spell of the silent little
Mälare bay. What would it not bring in its train?
Damage to property, stolen boats, poaching, brawls, servants
in trouble. And worst of all the horrid smell. A southerly
wind was a real trial to Selambshof nowadays. Stellan
called it the sirocco. But Peter thought in his heart that
the smell was rather pleasant. It smelt of money, money.
But as he walked and sniffed it, he grew impatient with the
sirocco all the same, but not in the same way as ordinary
people did. On the other shore, things moved along deuced
quickly he thought. But on this side Ekbacken can’t resist
for many years. And the town may expand in other
directions.</p>

<p>It was a close day in July. There had been a bad
drought this summer and the fields at Selambshof were
half scorched, and promised a failure of the crops. Between
the drooping and dusty elms of the avenue there
was a smell of carrion and old cheese. The whole estate
was enveloped in a vapour of putrefaction. The glue
works over on the other side of the lake vibrated in the
heat haze and seemed to dissolve in mere smells.</p>

<p>Peter suffered from the economic sirocco worse than
ever. He could not even remain in the observatory, but
had to go out for a walk in spite of the heat. How were
things going at Ekbacken? Eagerly but carefully he
spied round the corner, afraid of being seen, and cursing
beneath his breath the high wooden fence that Herman
had built towards the road. Then he moved on further
in order to see how the town was behaving. Well, at
last the new quay was ready. But how was building progressing
on this side? Peter ferretted amongst the dumps
of macadam and the blast holes. He searched for newly
staked-out building sites and for new foundations. No,
there was not enough progress to record. Why did they not
hurry on the work more? It irritated him to see the
workmen lying with their coats under their heads sleeping
amongst the stones after their lunch.</p>

<p>Peter returned home by another way. He took a dull,
ill-kept road, far back from the lake, which led on past
the old quarry between the bare hills. Unsightly, ragged,
untidy, the hill rose up, useless for all but the crows.
The black smoke from a goods train puffing up the incline
on the other side drifted slowly in between the dwarfed
and miserable pines. Peter stopped a moment in the
damp cold that rose even in the hot sun out of the fens
of Träskängen. He struck his stick on the dried-up lumps
of clay on the road and stared in front of him. He had
suddenly got an idea. The railway! he thought. The
railway! This corner is furthest from town, but I have
got the railway. I attack Ekbacken from behind. I am
finding gold on the rubbish heap!</p>

<p>He staggered home as in a delirium.</p>

<p>A few days later the shareholders of Selambshof were
summoned to a meeting. Peter told them in a few words
that he had found a buyer for the quarry and Träskängen.
“That rubbish is not worth keeping and we need money
to cover the bad season,” he said. Nobody had any
serious objection and the sale was made. The buyer was
Peter Selamb, through an agent of the name of Thomson.
Mr. Thomson got very favourable terms of payment.
Then there appeared an immense white board up in
the Quarry overlooking the railway and bearing the
words:</p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c004">
    <div><span class="large">“SOLBERGET and MAJÄNGEN</span></div>
    <div class="c000">Building Sites for Sale!</div>
    <div class="c000">Majängen Building Co.,   3, Nygatan, Stockholm.”</div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c003">Peter the Boss had thought it suitable to make this little
change in the old place-names.</p>

<p>At the same time a magnificent system of wide intersecting
streets was marked out with neat white painted posts
and iron stakes.</p>

<p>Strange to say the sites found a ready sale, for it was
during the golden time of uncritical speculation in suburban
land. And evidently there were some poor overcrowded,
shut up souls for whom even the Quarry and
Träskängen was a taste of liberty and of nature.</p>

<p>The whole autumn, winter and spring, the money dribbled
in regularly. “Majängen” was a splendid coup. But
Peter did not sit down on his gold hoard and purr. On
the contrary he grew more and more restless as his banking
account grew. He kept all his money in ready cash.
With this ace of trumps in his hands he watched eagerly
for the best moment to play it and gather in a fat trick.
His glass almost burnt in his hand when he directed it
towards Ekbacken. During many soliloquies he roamed
restlessly about outside the cursed high wooden fence.
Yes, yes, it reeked of an exquisite decay from afar. But
why did not that stupid Herman come to Peter the Boss?
If he had only known how willingly Peter would have
helped him! It was not right of him to forget an old
friend. Just fancy if Herman had been foolish enough
to throw himself into the arms of one of the banks in the
town, which would just hold his head above water for a
time in order to let him sink afterwards and then march
off with everything!</p>

<p>This thought worried Peter the Boss cruelly. One day
when he had seen Herman sail out with the usual case
of bottles he went straight through the high wooden gate
and in to old Lundbom in the office.</p>

<p>Lundbom sat there aged and grey-haired, with a worried
expression.</p>

<p>Peter stretched out a big and honest hand:</p>

<p>“Tell me all,” he said. “You can rely upon an old
country neighbour. I am Herman’s friend, though he does
not care about me. I want to help as much as I can.”</p>

<p>Lundbom had always had a sort of tender regard for
Peter. He had taught him to play “vira.” He had been
his legal adviser. With a sort of impartial pleasure he
had seen his knowledge boldly applied by his clever pupil.
In his theoretical eagerness he had been rather proud,
though he was himself the soul of honour, of his being
able to show Peter certain loopholes and snags. Old
Lundbom symbolised, as it were, the fate of the law in
this world: to be made use of by rogues.</p>

<p>Peter stood there with outstretched hand, and Lundbom
really could not help seizing it, though Herman had forbidden
all communication with Selambshof.</p>

<p>“What’s the position?” grunted Peter. “If I can do anything
I must know the position.”</p>

<p>Lundbom shook the ledger:</p>

<p>“There were losses last year already. This year will be
still worse.”</p>

<p>“The figures?”</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand last year. At least fifty thousand this
year, if things go on like this. Now we are selling out our
timber below cost. We are hard up for ready money.”</p>

<p>“Have you any specially difficult payment to make?”</p>

<p>“Yes, on Saturday week, a bill for twenty thousand.
Fancy, we who never used to touch bills before.”</p>

<p>“Who has got your bill?”</p>

<p>Lundbom mentioned a small notorious usurious banker.
Peter whistled. That bank proved that Herman had not
known how to look after his business in town properly.
He rose and pressed Lundbom’s hand:</p>

<p>“Good-bye! Not a word to Herman about this. He
must be managed carefully, poor boy, Good-bye!”</p>

<p>A week later Herman came back from his sailing trip.
He was once more sitting on the pier. The twilight was
strangely yellow. In the south a big grey-black cloud
floated, so heavy and solid-looking that it seemed a miracle
that it did not fall. A warm but strong south-easterly
wind had sprung up after the day’s calm. The leafy
mosses of the willows on the shore turned in the wind and
yellow crested waves beat with foreboding insistence
against the slimy green piles on their sloping stone ballast.
Then the foresail halyard of the cutter began to flap
persistently against the mast, a sound which in a badly
chosen harbour at night threatens to cast you adrift and
to shift your anchor in the dark.</p>

<p>Herman was sitting with outstretched legs. His chin
had sunk into the sweater and he stared motionless out
over the water. Over his whole being there descended
a chill shadow of loneliness which gave a touch of melancholy
and appeal even to his warm yachting shoes.</p>

<p>He stretched out for his whiskey glass but checked
his groping hand and muttered something to himself about
a renewal, a commission, and nine per cent. He came no
further. There he stopped. He refused, from a kind of
spite, to think any more than was necessary to keep things
just afloat for the moment. It was also from some foolish
spite that he had sought the assistance of an ill-famed
bank. “That fits in with me best,” he thought, “for
everybody thinks I am an impossible person.”</p>

<p>Ugh! business ... banks ... the whole town!</p>

<p>He felt such a strong desire to take flight in his boat
again that it hurt him. Alone! out into the storm and
darkness!</p>

<p>At this moment a massive figure came walking out
along the pier. There was something disarming even in
his way of dodging between the holes in the rotten floor-boards
of the pier. His little, round, wrinkled head
hung on one side between his enormous shoulders—as
if it were drooping from sheer compassion. He somehow
looked like an enormous child. He stopped and
looked at Herman, with two small watery eyes that threatened
to overflow.</p>

<p>Herman jumped up when he caught sight of the newcomer,
he drew himself to his full height, erect and rigid
as a post:</p>

<p>“What do you want here?”</p>

<p>Peter stretched out his arms, which resembled thighs
on which hands had happened to grow.</p>

<p>“Look here, old boy ... why should we go on like
this, ... two old friends like ourselves.... You know
I couldn’t help things....”</p>

<p>Herman suppressed his angry impulse and with a shrug
of his shoulders sank back on the seat, staring once again
out over the water where an old black-tarred fire-wood
smack was just taking in her topsail and slowly turning into
the wind with dark sails booming.</p>

<p>Peter seized the opportunity of sitting down on the seat
without further ceremony:</p>

<p>“You mustn’t think I am on Laura’s side,” he assured
Herman. “She is a handful, she is, without a heart in
her breast!”</p>

<p>“I have never asked to hear your opinion about my
divorced wife,” said Herman in a voice that was meant
to be frigid.</p>

<p>But all the same there was a corner in his soul where
Peter’s words did good. He could not hide his wound.
Peter noticed it at once. So much sensitiveness he had
left from the time of the Great Fear. Yes, yes, that is
the after-swell, he thought, and moved closer up to Herman,
ready to give him another dose. Then it suddenly started
to rain. Big, whipping drops. Herman rose silently,
taking his glass and bottle with him. Without looking
at Peter he walked quickly up to the house. “I don’t
mind your being short with me if it soothes you,” thought
Peter, and followed him faithfully up the steps and into the
smoking room.</p>

<p>Herman put the bottle on the table, threw himself on
the sofa and stared at his toes.</p>

<p>Peter took the matches and lit the lamp. Then he
went into the kitchen and returned with a couple of
bottles of soda water and a clean glass. After that he
filled Herman’s glass and prepared one for himself.</p>

<p>“Your health,” he said.</p>

<p>Herman drank deeply without replying. Then followed
a moment’s silence. The rain drummed against the
upper windows, and rushed down the rainpipes. A cool
damp penetrated into the close room.</p>

<p>Peter took a cigar out of a box and lit it:</p>

<p>“I’ll be damned if I don’t stay the night, old boy!
It feels jolly to be back at old Ekbacken again!”</p>

<p>Herman was still mute and seemed absorbed in the
opposite wall. But when Peter drank he drank also.
And that happened often. Peter thought the whiskey
tasted good. Yes it really was very jolly to be sitting
here at Ekbacken and see old father Hermansson’s
treasures gleam behind the glass of the cupboard in
the corner. He was already drinking Herman’s health,
the delightful sensation of being host himself and of
Herman being less secure in the place than himself. Not
that he was thinking of business tonight. He could save
that up for tomorrow. No, now he gave himself up
to his feelings and the whiskey. And it was no small
amount of feeling that he showed.</p>

<p>In the intervals between draining their glasses, Peter
suddenly began to abuse Laura again. Was this mere
calculation on his part? Did he sit there in cold blood
and sacrifice the sister for his own profit? Was he,
with his diabolical cunning, playing upon poor Herman’s
love and hate? No, Peter really began to realise Herman’s
loneliness. Was he not himself a poor bachelor too?
He felt real pity for Herman. Why shouldn’t he curse
Laura if it did any good to this poor devil—and to
himself, also, by the way? He sat there working up
his fury at the recollection of his sister’s old sarcasms.
Like a mad bull he tore fiercely and passionately at the
red tissue of lies, caprice, ingratitude, and cursed coquetry
called woman. Yes it was a relief to him to take his revenge
on the whole of the abominable sex that turned
up its nose at Peter the Boss, but ran after such scamps
as Brundin.</p>

<p>With a stiff expression of disapproval, Herman sat and
listened to Peter’s disclosures concerning Laura. But
he listened all the same—he couldn’t help it—till at last
he banged his fist on the table so that the glasses jumped:</p>

<p>“Be quiet,” he shrieked, “she is the mother of my child!”</p>

<p>Peter sat for a moment puzzled, he gasped and blinked
his eyes. Laura was evidently played out. He must
change his front:</p>

<p>“Herman, you are a gentleman,” he muttered at last,
admiringly, “I’ll be damned if you are not a gentleman.”</p>

<p>What was Peter the Boss to do now with all the vague
emotions that rose in his massive body? Some use must
be made of this beautiful intoxication. Yes, move at
once to the other extreme. He overflowed with sympathy
and brotherhood and memories from boyhood. “Do
you remember when it rained and we were playing in the
loft at home?” “Do you remember when we climbed
into the rigging down in the shipyard?” “Yes, that was
in the good old days, old boy!” “We have had a damned
fine time together all the same!”</p>

<p>Here Peter’s eyes filled with tears and he slapped
the old fellow on the back and swore that a helping hand
from Peter the Boss would not be lacking. Herman
made no opposition. He suddenly looked terribly tired.
He had been so utterly, miserably lonely. Though he
still felt suspicious he had no longer strength to resist.
Peter overpowered him by his sheer weight.</p>

<p>Peter forgot to remove his hand from Herman’s shoulder.
He felt a great, vague exaltation. At that moment he
really loved his dear old Herman. He felt an irresistible
desire to do something for him. The observatory, Majängen
and his errand to Ekbacken: all were forgotten in
this moment:</p>

<p>“Look here, Herman,” he muttered in a thick voice, “I
saw little Georg the other day. In his fourth year.
Sailor blouse and a whistle on a white cord. Your image.
Wouldn’t you like to have a look at him? Laura is going
away, so it is easy to arrange. He can stay for a few
days with the nurse at Selambshof. That’s not a bad
idea, eh? Now do say yes!”</p>

<p>Herman had not wanted to see his child. In his injured
pride he had refused for three years to allow himself
that crumb of comfort. Yes, he had almost imagined
that he hated the baby. Now he sank down with his hands
in front of his face:</p>

<p>“Tomorrow,” he muttered. “Tomorrow, before I change
my mind.”</p>

<p>“All right, tomorrow, old boy. With milk teeth and
whistle and spade and pail and all the rest of it. Come
up to Selambshof and have an afternoon whiskey and
soda and then you’ll see him.”</p>

<p>Peter rose. He stood there like a lump of dough, massive
and swaying to and fro, and would not let Herman’s
hand go:</p>

<p>“Tomorrow, old boy, tomorrow. Welcome!”</p>

<p>Then Peter the Boss walked home to Selambshof.</p>

<p>But Herman swept bottle and glass on to the floor and
then sat motionless as a statue and stared into the night
and thought of his son.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>There are men who are fat for slaughter and there
are those who are fattened by the slaughter of others.
Peter the Boss certainly belonged to the latter category.
But heavy and sluggish blood may still leave you a victim
of softer feelings. And Peter had, as we have seen, his
weaknesses. But the strange thing is that somehow when
it came to the point they always served his purpose. He
could yield to any excess of feelings because the real
Peter the Boss remained safely behind on guard. Whilst
others awoke with remorse and a splitting head, he realised
through the lifting mists that he was on the point of doing
a fine stroke of business.</p>

<p>Big and good-tempered, he now stood in his soiled
flannels and wide-brimmed sombrero by the corner of his
house and looked at the touching group on the terrace.
He was confoundedly fond both of the fair little thing between
the sand moulds and of that tall unhappy Herman
who had—God help him—dressed up in morning coat to
meet his son. Perhaps it was because they were both
equally helpless.</p>

<p>Herman sat there rigid and pale, torn by conflicting
emotions. He did not try to explain who he was. He did
not even dare to take the boy on his lap, he only looked
silently at the vivacious open face and the chubby little
eager hands. A living memory of the past! There they
had mixed their blood, he and the woman from whom
he would never escape as long as he lived.</p>

<p>There was a sighing of the wind in the old maple above
the rusty signalling guns. Here Laura had sat, and there
up the avenue he had come—always with that strange anxiety
in his inmost heart, Herman leant back on the
bench. A feeling of resignation stole over him. Here at
Selambshof he had met his fate—and here he would still
find it. Here were beings against whom it was no use
fighting.</p>

<p>Peter coughed before he came up to them, a wonderful
act of delicacy on his part.</p>

<p>Then the nurse came to put little Georg to bed. Herman
started up as if in alarm. He lifted the boy up in his
arms as if to kiss him, but put him down again and sank
back on the seat beside Peter.</p>

<p>“I hope you have not talked about me—you have not
told the nurse who I am,” he muttered.</p>

<p>“Not a word,” Peter assured him.</p>

<p>But Herman felt all the same a pang in his heart.
“Then Laura won’t hear of it,” he thought. “And she
won’t be forced to give me a thought.” And he hated
himself because he could not help feeling a cold emptiness.
In one draught he emptied the glass before him.</p>

<p>But Peter carefully slipped into business. He did not
of course speak of Herman’s bill that was due or of the
affairs of Ekbacken at all. He only said that he had
met somebody who wanted to invest about fifty thousand
crowns on good security. And then he had thought of
Herman at once. Times were difficult and working capital
always useful.</p>

<p>Herman did not seem to hear at first. Then his face
contracted at the thought of this wretched business. And
then he suddenly assumed the cold, severe, businesslike
tone which is so often found in very impatient people:</p>

<p>“Terms? Interest?”</p>

<p>“Not bad—six per cent—”</p>

<p>“If I am to consider the proposition I must have half
tomorrow against my promissory note until the bills of
sale are redeemed.”</p>

<p>“Aha!” thought Peter the Boss, “there you gave yourself
away. I should never have said that.”</p>

<p>“Well,” he muttered, “you might get about twenty thousand
at once.”</p>

<p>Herman felt that this was easy. He glanced suspiciously
at Peter:</p>

<p>“Who is this benefactor? Does he prefer to remain
unknown?”</p>

<p>Peter smiled and looked transparently honest:</p>

<p>“Not at all, he is O. W. Thomson, director of Majängen.
I can vouch for him. Decent fellow. I shall be pleased
to arrange the business for you out of gratitude for all
you have done for us at Ekbacken.”</p>

<p>Herman suspected that Thomson was Peter’s dummy.
A few days ago when old Lundbom, encouraged by a certain
visit he had received, had hinted vaguely at Peter,
Herman had sworn that he would never have anything to
do with Selambshof. But before he walked home that
evening he had all the same arranged for a meeting. He
was not strong enough to resist.</p>

<p>The following day it appeared that O. W. Thomson had
gone away. The matter could not be arranged until two
days later, that is to say, the day before the due date
of Herman’s bill. And then Thomson was in a bad temper.
He demanded eight per cent and only a month’s notice.
It was risky. Peter had done what he could but that
confounded Thomson was quite impossible. There was
nothing left for Herman to do but sign and rush off to
the bank.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Peter continued these friendly potations with Herman.
He enjoyed his company very much, and showed a touching
interest for his welfare, yes, he really ministered to his
weaknesses:</p>

<p>“You have been living in hell, Herman,” he said.
“It has got on your nerves.” (Yes, Peter had actually
found out that there were such things as nerves.) “You
must take care of yourself, sleep, amuse yourself, go sailing.
Lundbom looks after the business. He is a magician,
old Lundbom.”</p>

<p>“As if it helped to sail,” muttered Herman, as gloomy
as the Flying Dutchman.</p>

<p>But he did go sailing, anyhow, and Peter went too,
and did not let go of his dear Herman. And when now
after long stormy cruises out to sea, they had dropped
their hook far out in a fine night harbour under some
rugged cliff and the waves roared on the pebbles on the
shore and the crescent moon shone over the sea, whilst
the evening sky hung green and cold over the long ragged
forest edges in the west, then they both revelled in a
beautiful and romantic hatred of the town, its dirt and
stuffiness and humbug and misery. It was a most beautiful
accord between shyness, laziness and weakness on the one
hand and instinctive, furtive, self-interest on the other.
To Herman the town meant rubbish, masons, walls
scrawled all over, insidious threats against the idyls of his
childhood. But it also meant his great smouldering trouble,
neglected duties and a bad conscience. For Peter on
the other hand the town meant ten thousand possibilities
and the fine opportunities which Herman must not suspect.
He liked to finish off his exhortation with little edifying
stories, terrifying little accounts of the cursed
banks.</p>

<p>“Yes, beware of the banks, Herman,” he exclaimed.
“Bills here and bills there and not a moment’s peace. One
fine day they get you into their clutches and then you
have to say good-bye to everything. But we will defend
ourselves, old boy. We know a few little tricks, we
rustics too, now don’t we? If you get into difficulties
don’t make them offers. There is nothing so dangerous
as to make them offers. No, you come to Peter the Boss
and he will stand by you. Not an inch shall they have
of Ekbacken and Selambshof.”</p>

<p>Herman sat there eating his tinned food, half touched,
half suspicious.</p>

<p>“Yes, but you have already sold some of it.”</p>

<p>Peter smiled a superior smile:</p>

<p>“Don’t you understand. I tricked them, tricked those
town scoundrels splendidly. Sold away the rubbish heap
in order to sit more securely in the Castle.”</p>

<p>There Herman had got something to sleep on. And
in fact he did sleep better than usual. It was as if Peter
had lifted the worries from off his back and taken them
on his own broad shoulders.</p>

<p>Peter also snored soundly. He had not by any means
done everything he might have done to ensure and isolate
his victim. Never! he who liked Herman so much! No,
he had only been jolly decent and said what he knew
Herman liked to hear.</p>

<p>And when Peter afterwards came into town and told
everybody he met that that fellow at Ekbacken was far
too fine for business, and that he had such damned bad
luck in all he did, it was not done at all in order to
destroy the last remnants of Herman’s credit and make
him even more impossible than before. He merely felt
so frightfully sorry for Herman that it was impossible
for him to keep quiet about it.</p>

<p>But the whole manœuvre was as a matter of fact quite
unnecessary. When, towards the autumn, cash again began
to run short, Herman simply had not the energy to go to
anybody else but Peter. The mere thought of going to
cold strangers made him shiver. And Peter did not say
“no.” He really surpassed himself. Herman got all
he wanted at once on the security of a new mortgage
on Ekbacken, though this time with lower interest and a
more reasonable notice of calling in.</p>

<p>Herman was really moved when he went home. Fancy
if it had been Laura who had repented and forced Peter
to this. Yes he really lived on this fantastic dream
through the whole of the autumn. Poor Herman, his
pride had been dealt a severe blow.</p>

<p>But a great calm had descended on Peter after his
former restlessness. The sirocco no longer irritated him.
He had only to wait for the ripening of the fruit now.
Soon he would be able to free Herman from all his worries
about Ekbacken, which only made him unhappy.</p>

<p>Whilst waiting, Peter made little dreary excursions to
his little gold mine “Majängen” and “Solberget.”</p>

<p>It was mostly poorer people who had ventured out to
the new suburb. They blasted, and dug, and sawed and
hammered in nails. Quite a lot of queer looking cottages
had already been hammered together down in the marsh
and up in the quarry. And there were already geraniums
in the windows and children on the doorsteps. Peter
shook his head, smiled and pondered. “They build,”
he thought. “That’s a mistake. They ought to buy from
those who overbuild themselves. But they are decent people
all the same, quite decent people.” He moved on carefully
among the blocks of stone and the clay holes in the
staked-out streets. He stopped before an arbour consisting
of a few recently planted lilac bushes of the size of broom,
in front of a patch of golden nasturtiums in a cleft in
the granite filled with soil.</p>

<p>Peter the Boss really felt quite touched. It is strange
how poetic poverty can be—in others. Fancy how simply
one can live. Yes, they were really quite comfortable
here in Majängen and Solberget. Peter actually began
to feel a benefactor of all these people. “Goodness!
I wonder if I did not let those sites go too cheaply,” he
thought.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Ekbacken was ripening, as I have said before.</p>

<p>One day towards winter Herman came up to Selambshof
and wanted more money. But the end had come, Peter had
not a penny free. To crown it all that fellow Thomson
came to Ekbacken a few days later and called in his
fifty thousand. Herman ran over to Peter again. He
had no hope. No, in his heart he knew that Peter and
Thomson were one and the same. But he went all the
same, he had nobody else to turn to after the way he
had managed his business in town.</p>

<p>Peter grew furious with Thomson:</p>

<p>“I shall go in to town and lay down the law to that
scoundrel,” he said.</p>

<p>As might have been expected, Thomson would not move.
But Peter returned with a new proposal:</p>

<p>“I have managed to interest a few old boys in Ekbacken,”
he said. “They are prepared to take over the whole thing
and there will still be a nice little sum left over for you.
You will escape all trouble and worry and get a little pile
of thousand-crown notes that you can do what you deuced
well like with!”</p>

<p>Herman sat there pale and with trembling hands:</p>

<p>“Yes, but the house ... the boat....”</p>

<p>“Well ... the old boys want the lot, of course....”</p>

<p>Herman started in alarm, like a child that has been
left alone out in the forest. His home...! His memories
from childhood ... the memory of Laura ... the
boat ... his retreat, his consolation!</p>

<p>“No, I will never agree to that! It is too damnable!”</p>

<p>He rushed out of Selambshof. He roamed about the
roads. It was a snowless winter day, raw and windy,
when everything wears a frozen, worn face without the
peace of age. He stopped and beat the dry thistles on
the roadside with his stick. “I have been a child,” he
thought. “A weak, obstinate, helpless wretch. But now
I must become a man. Now I must go into town and
fight for Ekbacken, tooth and nail.”</p>

<p>He hastened towards the town, walking and running,
but as he approached the toll bar, his steps became
slower. The old hopelessness, laziness, and cowardice
crept over him again. “What’s the use?” he muttered.
“Everybody is expecting my ruin, the workmen, the foreman,
Lundbom, Peter ... everybody.... What’s the
use?”</p>

<p>Huddled up, shivering, crushed with shame, he slunk
into Ekbacken by a side path. He sank groaning into
a settee and swallowed a glass of undiluted whiskey.
And out of the whiskey came a thought, the thought
of flight and failure, but also the thought of a thousand
possibilities:</p>

<p>“America!”</p>

<p>Peter the Boss had been right in his calculation. Three
days later the business was settled and Herman received
twenty thousand crowns.</p>

<p>“You saved the slam anyhow, old boy,” said Peter,
“You saved the slam anyhow.”</p>

<p>He was pleased with himself for having helped a friend
in difficulties. It hurt him that Herman went about looking
drained dry. And then those stupid America plans. Why
the devil should Herman want to go away? With whom
was Peter now to drink his whiskey during the long winter
evenings? Who would be with him when he was out
sailing in his new yacht? Herman, who knew the boat so
well.</p>

<p>“It will be empty after you, Herman,” complained Peter,
“damned empty.”</p>

<p>But for once Herman stuck to his decision and so the
moment of farewell arrived. Peter was down at the station.
Herman was already at the carriage window, filled
with an impotent bitterness both sharp and dull. He
had been a hopeless failure, fit to be plucked and cast
aside. Laura and Peter had taken everything away from
him. And in spite of it all he had not got the strength
of mind to hate them. Yes, when he saw Peter’s coarse
face, swollen with emotion, he positively did not know
what to believe. “Perhaps he has really done what he
could for me,” he thought. “And it was rather decent of
him to come down here so that I need not be quite alone.”</p>

<p>Then the engine took its first deep breath as if it were
challenging the distance it was about to cover.</p>

<p>Peter wept. He could not let go Herman’s hand:</p>

<p>“Good-bye, old boy! Take care of yourself now.
Good-bye, Herman!”</p>

<p>And then old Hermansson’s tall Herman was swept off
the stage.</p>

<p>But Peter the Boss drove slowly home in Brundin’s
old dog-cart. He was both sad and glad. When he had
passed the toll bar he fell into a solemn mood. The short
cut across Ekbacken was open to him now. Somebody
ran to the gate to open it for him. He drove past the house
on the lake side and past the landing stage and the old
office. Dusk began to fall and Peter felt suddenly very
sorry for himself. What had he not undertaken! Fancy
looking after all this. The road now ran along the lake.
Peter held the reins very loosely and by and by the horse
stopped. It was perfectly still and the lake was on the
point of freezing over. A big, cold, glowing cloud hung
over Kolsnäs and was reflected in the glassy surface of
the water. The heavy clatter of a horse’s hoofs on the floating
bridge floated out into the quiet of the evening. Peter
sighed deeply. He envied Herman. Fancy travelling
about with twenty thousand in your pocket. He will see
something of the world. But I, old peasant, will never get
abroad anywhere. I sit here in old Selambshof ... and
old Ekbacken....</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">XIII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">TORD’S EXILE</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Lately Selambshof had not been as quiet as usual.
The scattered brothers and sisters began once more
to find the way back to the ancestral home.</p>

<p>The fact of the matter was that the estate was growing
more and more valuable every day. The town had already
begun—to Peter’s great joy—to encroach upon a
part of Ekbacken. Now it began to stretch its arms
around Selambshof. And like old King Midas it changed
all it touched into gold.</p>

<p>Yes, it was extraordinarily pleasant to sit there and feel
how you were growing richer and richer every moment.
And then they had to look after their interests, keep an
eye on each other, and especially on the honourable director
of Selambshof Limited.</p>

<p>It was curious to watch the Selambs when they were together.
They quarrelled terribly, but stuck together all
the same—just like the Bonaparte family. None believed
another. They laid mines and countermines. They tricked
one another until they got even, so that in the end a
sort of rough natural justice prevailed. Peter the Boss
now sat in the prisoner’s dock as a result of a too bare-faced
falsification of the accounts of Majängen and Solberget
Ltd. Laura unhesitatingly accused him, in the clearest
and most spirited terms of being a false old thief.
Stellan’s sword play was more skilful and he got in a
whole series of neat little thrusts, each one of which would
have been a sufficient indictment in a prosecution for misrepresentation
and misappropriation. Peter smiled complacently
at these accusations, which he regarded as so
many pleasant expressions of recognition of his merit. He
lied with a certain heavy grace to this assembly of expert
connoisseurs. Behind all his lies lay all the same the truth
that he had really done great things for Selambshof. And
he realised that in their inmost hearts his sisters and
brothers knew they must look up to him, Peter the Boss, as
the eldest and the head of the family. And after all the
whole quarrel was sunk in the great and glorious consciousness
of the daily increasing value of Selambshof.</p>

<p>But towards the spring these meetings were not quite
as agreeable as usual. That was the fault of Tord. Yes,
the despised, neglected, almost forgotten Tord down there
in The Rookery began to cause the high family council
very serious anxiety. He had dismissed the bohemian
painter who had been a parasite on him for several years
and instead he had returned with a woman, a slovenly
person who spoke a sort of Norwegian and who was a very
dubious person. Well, that might have passed if Tord had
not got the mad idea of marrying her. The Selambs had
had a terrible shock when they saw in the paper the reading
of the banns. And now a fortnight later they were
sitting by a big wood fire in the icy hall of Selambshof
and knew no more than that Tord had driven to town with
the woman that morning. They might already be married
by now, though the sisters and brothers had been told nothing.
Really it was extraordinary behaviour....</p>

<p>Let us now see how Tord Selamb had come to do this
most unexpected thing: arranging for the banns to be read
and going to church to be married.</p>

<p>The story really begins with the severing of Träskängen
and the Quarry. Peter had in some way tricked Tord into
being absent at the meeting when the sale was decided on.
This put him into a fury which increased in violence when
Tord saw the secret retreat of his youth defiled by boundary
posts, trenches, blasting and disgusting hordes of insolent
intruders. His protracted fury finally resulted in
some immoderate and indignant articles in the yellow press.
Tord was not, of course, indignant that people should be
tricked into living on a marsh and on a refuse dump.
No, he was furious because of this encroachment upon his
dominion of boxes of lizards and frogs. He tried to enlist
science in his cause by clamouring about some rare
marsh flowers and an unique diving bug. It was a vehement
defence of the wilderness and an infuriated battle
cry against the town. And the whole concluded with some
mixed reflections of a hermit’s spleen, pseudo-science, artist’s
slang and bad nature-lyrics.</p>

<p>The articles were of course anonymous. But Peter recognised
the author from certain attacks and exposures. He
was not ungrateful for this valuable free advertisement of
Majängen and Solberget, which must now appear to the
uninitiated as a glorious paradise in the wilderness. But
for the sake of order he made certain representations to
his youngest brother, which resulted in a quarrel, during
which Tord gave vent to his excitement by letting off his
gun, into the air it is true, but still a gunshot.</p>

<p>Filled with a new indignation, Tord continued his articles
and painted on the wall the devil of capitalistic greed
despoiling nature, with features which resembled those of
Peter the Boss to a nicety. He began to develop a taste
for writing. He suddenly felt that he was meant to be a
writer, and was at once seized with a violent contempt for
the art of painting. It is true that all he wrote, except
those violent articles of propaganda, was cast into the
editor’s waste paper basket, but that only increased his
irritation without in any way convincing him of his incapacity.
After a quarrel with his old painter-friend over
the relative values of the two arts he without further ado
kicked out the disgusting parasite who had tricked him
into wasting the most beautiful years of his youth with
such rubbish as the crayon and the paint brush.</p>

<p>The painter was gone. Libations with Peter were over.
Tord was alone, quite alone with his foxes and crows and
mice in the gruesome Rookery.</p>

<p>He got into the habit of making long excursions into
the town—the detestable town. Nothing like it had happened
to him since he had slipped out there as a boy in
profound secrecy for some devilment. At that time he
had had a strange, secret partnership with some unknown
vagabond in whose company he had pilfered in the market
place and cut holes in sacks of flour down by Skeppsbron.
He remembered the latter especially because of the strange,
soothing satisfaction it afforded him to stand there in the
twilight and feel the cool, velvety flour running through
his fingers into the mud. He had already begun to revel
in destruction, perhaps from a precocious, instinctive
hatred of all the culture on which society is based.</p>

<p>Tord hated the town, but not in the same way as Herman,
to whom it meant lawsuits and a bad conscience. Tord
did not suffer from his conscience. No, he had an instinctive
hatred of all the adaptability, refinement, co-operation
and methodical work for which it stood. He detested the
great complex machine in which men are only cogs. It
was the complex purposefulness and relative common sense
of teeming civic life which tormented him.</p>

<p>But Stockholm was becoming a great city and as such
it had another side. It was a jungle, a wilderness of stone,
the home of the thronging masses and of cold emptiness
by night. But the town began to exert a certain fascination
over Tord. He was going to be a writer, as we know,
and those who can do nothing else can always explore the
special vices of the imagination. He discovered that loneliness
in a crowd has many joys for a fastidious individualist.
The masses are necessary, so that we may look
down on them. In the crush of humanity we dream so
easily of the lofty heights from which all below look like
creeping things. It is always so with the dreams of sterile
genius. It would begin at the top, forgetful of all that
lies below.</p>

<p>So much for Tord and the throng. But he did not hold
out long. He soon relapsed into restless despair. He was
frightened by the very masses over which he had just
triumphed, and fled, full of loathing, home to The
Rookery.</p>

<p>No, it was better in the emptiness and the cold stony
landscape. To stroll about in the deserted outskirts of
the town in the uncertain spring twilight when the masses
of houses rise up like huge banks of darkness in the waning
light and the street lamps look like giant submarine lilies
which have collected all the cold phosphorescent light.
To drift about on still summer’s nights when the lamps
are out and everything sleeps at the bottom of a green sea,
where the desires of our dreams move silently like great
fishes. The town in storm and darkness when the lonely
wanderer, stimulated by drink, imagines himself lord of
this brooding deserted world of stone! The town as landscape,
as nature, as the hunting ground of all the wild
instincts. The narrow back street defiles, the dark ambushes
of the doorways, the snares of the public house and
the bordel. Hazard, adventure, vice, women! Yes, every
evening the town was a great wild jungle where the chase
of women was permitted. Tord pursued this chase with
a restless and obstinate interest. He had the lonely man’s
long vision for a woman’s shadow. He could follow one
after the other for hours but without being able to approach
one. He was consumed by an envious hatred of the enterprise
of others more bold. He returned home dead tired,
embittered and lonely, lonely....</p>

<p>Nevertheless it was in this hunting ground that Tord
Selamb at last met his fate. It was one dark, rainy, icy cold
evening in March. Hot and cold, heedless and obstinate
he followed a woman. But it did not end as usual.
The dark shadow would not allow itself to be caught; it
did not suddenly vanish in a doorway. The figure in
front of him only walked on and on, against the wind,
restlessly, without goal or purpose, it seemed, but sharply
dismissing all who accosted it. Now and then it dived
into a dark back street or crept into a gateway, but more
from caprice than to escape its pursuers. The purposelessness
of its roving movements fascinated Tord in quite a
peculiar way. It was like a beast of the forest, he thought.
He had not yet seen its face but its step was young and
springy. This was really no idle loitering. It walked
with the conscious energy of one who is angry and mumbles
disjointed phrases to himself. Then it walked towards the
southern heights of the town. Then steps and a square
with melancholy sighing trees, and then a cobbled back
street with a few yellow flickering lamps on posts at the
corners of the ramshackle old houses. It was a cul-de-sac,
terminating in a big wooden barrier. Below glimmered
the rough wet sides of the hill, lit up by the lights along
a flight of steps on the other side of a deep, dark, shaft-like
yard. The woman did not appear to notice Tord.
She took something out of her pocket and hurled it down
into the depths. It struck the stone with a faint metallic
sound. Tord was now standing beside her. What had
she thrown down? The question burnt his lips but he
remained mute in spite of himself. She turned round and
was about to resume her progress, when a sound was heard
from the black bag she carried in her hand. She suddenly
pulled out a little grey kitten and kissed it:</p>

<p>“Kirre,” she mumbled, “darling little Kirre....”</p>

<p>The kitten was Tord’s fate, it broke for a moment the
spell of his dumbness:</p>

<p>“What did you throw down?” he asked suddenly.</p>

<p>She carefully put the kitten back again and answered
without looking at him, straight into the chilly darkness,
but in a tone of triumph and determination:</p>

<p>“It was the key.”</p>

<p>“What key?”</p>

<p>“To the studio, of course. Beastly, disgusting creature!
Now that’s done with at last!”</p>

<p>And then came her story, disingenuous, straightforward,
unblushing, and with a strong appeal. She had been living
with a sculptor who had recently returned from Paris.
She had been with him the whole winter. Oh, how she
had spoilt the beast! Cooked his food and been his model
all the day. She was posing as the young witch. “And
everybody said I was a splendid witch,” she exclaimed,
whilst an angry little smile flashed beneath the dripping
brim of her hat. But what had this beast of a sculptor
done when his lump of clay was ready? He had gone to
an uncle in Kalmar to get some money. He would be
back in a few days, he said. But no, not a sign of life
for a fortnight. She had been sitting there cold and
starving in company with the witch under her damp cover.
But now that was over. Now she had stuck a knife and
fork into the witch’s hands and an empty breadbasket on
her head and the sculptor’s old pipe in her mouth. And
now she had left and only taken Kirre with her. And
down there lay the key and it was impossible to find it
again.</p>

<p>“So now you will have to get food for me and the cat
and a roof over our heads,” she said quickly to Tord.</p>

<p>Tord asked for nothing better. For once he did not feel
anxious or suspicious. She seemed to him like a hunted
animal. She was like the fox he had freed from the trap
and taken home.</p>

<p>He took her home to The Rookery. Not until the following
morning did he think of asking her name. She
was called Dagmar Bru and was the daughter of a Norwegian
musician in Copenhagen, she said. Probably
some dissolute fiddler who scraped in some low-class restaurant.
Her mother she could not remember. She had
worked at a lace curtain factory before she came to the
sculptor. Tord could get no more out of her and he did
not press her. He loved hearing how she had hated the
mill. There was style about her. Something wild and
free. A beautiful witch! She had fair hair, plentiful,
luxuriant, rough hair. A real mane. It was rather uneven,
for she had simply cut it off where it was entangled.
Any jewellery she could find she put on just like a savage.</p>

<p>Dagmar stayed at The Rookery. Tord would not let her
go. He loved her with a love that consisted largely of scolding
and sulking, and which was therefore sincere. He
needed her. At whom otherwise could he hurl his bitter
reflections on Woman. Once when he had been worse than
usual she threatened to go back to her father, the musician.
Then he felt how terribly empty it would be not to have
her as a butt for his reproaches. He became frightened,
frightened to the bottom of his heart lest she should throw
away the key of The Rookery as she had done that of the
studio. And then he suddenly did something that he had
never dreamed of before. He asked her to become his
wife.</p>

<p>Dagmar said that marriage would be something quite
new—one might always try it.</p>

<p>So they had the banns read and drove to church on the
same day as the great family council met at Selambshof.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Laura was warming her toes on the fender and quickly
swallowed a third cup of coffee:</p>

<p>“Tord is an egoist,” she exclaimed in a tone of moral
indignation. “He is an awful egoist. He has no regard
for others.”</p>

<p>All agreed. Stellan’s ever watchful irony seemed to
have vanished. He found nothing ridiculous in such
words on Laura’s lips. He felt with a queer sort of bitterness
that in Tord the Selamb egoism had declined
from the high plane on which it was assured of success
in the world. He was dangerous, Tord, he did not hide
what ought to be hidden, he unmasked them all; he was
a caricature of them.</p>

<p>Peter stood watching in the window. He made a sign.
A cab came driving up the avenue. It was Tord and that
woman. No doubt about it. Tord wore a white tie. It
was the first time they had ever seen him in a white tie.
And the woman had a bouquet of flowers in her hand.
They had come from church....</p>

<p>Stellan stamped on the floor:</p>

<p>“Damn him! He must get out of this. I can’t have
him within five miles’ distance of my mess and my club!”</p>

<p>“We ought to have let the police take that woman,”
fumed Laura. “And Tord ought to be in some kind of
home. Hasn’t he even tried to shoot Peter?”</p>

<p>Peter had kept silent the whole time and looked very
mysterious. Now he thought the right moment had arrived:</p>

<p>“I was out duck shooting a week or two ago,” he grunted.
“It was at a place called Järnö which lies far out at sea.
A fine island. And it is for sale. Fancy if we put Tord
in a boat and took him out there....”</p>

<p>At that moment somebody stepped into the hall. It was
Mrs. Dagmar Selamb in an open fur coat, white silk frock
and somewhat down-at-heel shoes. She did not look at
all nervous or anxious. There was something light-hearted,
something irrepressibly carefree about her:</p>

<p>“How do you do,” she said. “I thought I would call
whilst I still had some decent clothes!”</p>

<p>She was greeted by amazed, icy silence.</p>

<p>Dagmar shook her fair mane with a little flash of impatience:</p>

<p>“Perhaps it seems strange that I haven’t brought him
with me. He is playing with his Japanese mice, poor fellow,
and in his new black evening dress, too! We must
excuse him. ‘I won’t go up to those bourgeois!’ he
screamed. ‘But I am going,’ I said. ‘They have done
nothing to me,’ I said. Well, and here I am. The whole
family is assembled, I see....”</p>

<p>Again a few moments of the same silence. Dagmar’s
features were at last overshadowed by a certain doubt as
to whether she was welcome.</p>

<p>Then Peter suddenly stepped up to her and took her
hand:</p>

<p>“Congratulations,” he said, “congratulations.”</p>

<p>And suddenly all of them smiled, struck by the same
thought as Peter. They were splendid, those Selambs.
They realised at once that it was important to gain an ally.</p>

<p>“You can’t be very comfortable down in The Rookery,”
said Laura.</p>

<p>Dagmar threw her coat on a chair and sat down by the
fire:</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s good enough for us.”</p>

<p>Peter followed Laura:</p>

<p>“But how would it be to have your own place?”</p>

<p>Dagmar laughed:</p>

<p>“I see, you want to get rid of us!”</p>

<p>“It is for Tord’s sake,” continued Stellan. “We had
thought it would be a little surprise. He is such a lover
of nature....”</p>

<p>“I suppose it is somewhere at the end of the world,”
asked Dagmar.</p>

<p>“Not at all,” Peter cut in. “It is out in the skerries by
the sea. You couldn’t have a finer view. And such lots
of game, sea birds and capercailzie and hares and foxes.
That would be something for Tord. Fancy to be one’s
own master and live exactly as one likes....”</p>

<p>Dagmar’s eyes suddenly lit up:</p>

<p>“The sea, you say. And do you think I could go out
every morning and lie down quite naked in the sunshine?”</p>

<p>“Of course, that’s just what I mean.”</p>

<p>Dagmar was too absorbed in her thoughts to hear Laura
snigger.</p>

<p>“I am perfectly mad on lying naked in the sunshine,”
she said, in a serious tone.</p>

<p>“Good, then we agree.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I like your proposal very much. But how shall
we manage to get Selamb to agree? He is so crazy sometimes,
poor fellow. You simply can’t imagine.”</p>

<p>“Oh! be careful in the beginning” said Peter. “Flatter
him a bit. Tell him that he has money enough to buy his
own estate. That he ought to free himself from that
cursed fellow, Peter the Boss. But our little sister-in-law
will know better than I what to say.”</p>

<p>Dagmar rose smiling, pleased with the cunning which
she would display.</p>

<p>“Good, there’s my hand. I shall be like a snake. Good-bye,
all of you. He must have something to eat. I think
you are jolly nice, all of you!”</p>

<p>With that Mrs. Dagmar Selamb went out in her shabby
shoes—not without a certain savage grace.</p>

<p>And so they bribed Tord’s wife on her wedding day.</p>

<p>The solemn family council laughed and laughed. Laura
writhed:—“Lying quite naked in the sun,” she screamed.
“I am mad on lying absolutely naked in the sun.”</p>

<p>The laughter was soon followed by a quarrel, one of
the sharpest in the history of the family council. And
of course it was on a question of money. Tord had nothing
but his shares in Selambshof, no ready money. There
was first a keen debate as to who ought to collect the purchase
money. Peter sat silent and let the others talk.
Yes, Peter the Boss had suddenly become strangely indifferent.
His cigar seemed to absorb him completely. This
was a mock battle that he did not mind them fighting.
He knew very well that he was the only one who had
ready money. At last he said quietly that perhaps he
could manage to scrape together a little.</p>

<p>The others suddenly grew suspicious of Peter’s indifference.</p>

<p>“You have been arranging the whole thing beforehand.
You think you are going to earn money by this. You
are going to cheat Tord,” they cried.</p>

<p>Peter defended himself like a bear amongst a swarm of
bees, half conscious of his guilt and half pleased, but without
feeling their stings very much. He blinked his eyes,
grunted and beat them off with both his hands.</p>

<p>“Good, don’t let us talk any more about it. I am not a
member of any smart clubs. I don’t entertain. I like
my whiskey and soda with Tord even though he does shoot
at me occasionally.”</p>

<p>“Don’t talk nonsense,” Stellan cut in. “What conditions
have you thought of?”</p>

<p>“A moment ago I was really prepared to buy some of
Tord’s shares,” Peter said reproachfully.</p>

<p>“At what price?” asked Laura with a sneer.</p>

<p>“At par,” grunted Peter. And it was as if he had torn
this offer out of his bleeding heart.</p>

<p>His sister and brother laughed ironically, pitilessly. It
would be very nice indeed to be able to buy the shares at
that price. No, at least double. They were consumed
by a noble indignation. They were full of fight in the
cause of poor Tord. Peter was laid on the rack and was
mercilessly compelled to offer more and more. He pulled
faces, puffed, swore, writhed, but it was all of no use.
Selamb against Selamb, diamond cut diamond. Finally
they set to work coolly and keenly without the aid of lies.
Things went so far that there were threats of dismissing
the manager from his post. They all thought they had
been cheated by Peter. Now was the opportunity for revenge.
He was forced to give a binding guarantee of one
hundred thousand crowns for half of Tord’s shares and
not to take any commission on the purchase of Järnö.</p>

<p>Thus unconsciously Tord did a good stroke of business
whilst he sat there feeding his Japanese mice—thanks to
the envy of his brothers and sisters.</p>

<p>As things turned out there was no need to handle Tord
delicately. He agreed at once when he heard of an island
full of living creatures. And the sea! That would
be something for his poetic bent. And when Peter, who
had done all he possibly could in the matter, came and
put the sixty thousand crowns that were left after the purchase
of Järnö into his hands, he was so astounded that
he forgot his suspicions for a whole week. Then for the
first time he began to tell Dagmar that that cursed Peter
had of course cheated him, though he could not say exactly
how.</p>

<p>He was, as a matter of fact, right. Peter had at the
last moment got Järnö five thousand crowns cheaper than
his sisters and brothers were told. So he earned a little
on the business all the same.</p>

<p>Thus Tord moved out to Järnö with a lot of cages. He
had a whole menagerie. And Dagmar looked rather like
a tamer of wild animals.</p>

<p>The old dilapidated dwelling house lay in a little garden
among the small patches of cultivated ground below the
rocks in the southern part of the island. Tord could not
live there. It was too tame—too close to his tenant’s little
red cottage. No, they must build a log hut of coarse timber
on the highest cliff, a real eagle’s eyrie with a view
over his estate of stones and water!</p>

<p>Here we shall find him later on, just as before in the
old Rookery by the muddy bay of Lake Mälare—but all
the same as if grown greater by the sea and the winter
loneliness.</p>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c004">
    <div>END OF PART ONE</div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>

<div class="nf-center-c0">
<div class="nf-center c002">
    <div><span class="xlarge">PART TWO</span></div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c002" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">I<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">LAURA ENTERTAINS</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Laura cast a glance down the esplanade before she
pulled the blind. She had moved to Narvavägen now.
It was the most fashionable quarter.</p>

<p>The September evening was clear and cool. The prosperous-looking
windows in the house opposite threw back
discreet golden reflections. The little church at the corner
looked like a luxurious bigoted needlework box. The recently
planted trees of the esplanade were as like each
other as soldiers in a row marching in column order out
towards the fields.</p>

<p>Laura sighed faintly and contentedly. Everybody was
back in town. The season was beginning.</p>

<p>She switched on the light. The cream coloured blind
completed the circle of coquettish intimacy. She sat down
at her dressing table. In the mirror she saw a face which
still retained the seaside sunburn. It suited her well, made
her hair still fairer and her teeth whiter. Laura was now
a woman of thirty. There was something of the fair renaissance
type in her plumpness, something at one and the
same time crude and refined. Her quick smile was full of
health and light impudence.</p>

<p>But just now Laura was not smiling. On the whole women
are never so serious as when they are occupied with
their personal appearance. During the siege of the Legations
during the Boxers’ rising in China it is told that a
lady stole yolks of eggs, whilst people died of starvation
all round her, in order to preserve the colour of her hair.
That is serious....</p>

<p>Laura always had a long tête-à-tête with her face before
she paraded it in public.</p>

<p>She became very impatient as somebody hesitatingly fingered
the door handle and little Georg at last stepped in.</p>

<p>Georg was very like his father. He had his long face
and fair eyes. In this case the weaker had been the
stronger. It looked like nature’s revenge. She had always
the image of the wronged father before her.</p>

<p>Georg smiled the hesitating smile of the neglected child.
There was a certain shyness about him as he crept up to the
mother.</p>

<p>Laura’s face hardened as she turned from the mirror:</p>

<p>“Don’t touch me! You soil my clothes.”</p>

<p>Georg humbly drew back:</p>

<p>“Mummie darling, may I stay up a little longer?”</p>

<p>“No, you must obey Sofi!”</p>

<p>“But mummie, why must I always go to bed when people
come?”</p>

<p>“That’s enough. Run away now. I’m in a hurry!”</p>

<p>He went slowly, looking troubled, but he stopped at the
door:</p>

<p>“May I sit and play in bed a little at least?”</p>

<p>“All right, but run away now!”</p>

<p>Then Georg went to bed. And in bed he sat and drew
a picture of his mummie as a hobgoblin. But then he
grew frightened of what he had done and drew her as a
princess. And when Sofi came to pull down the blind he
lay awake in the twilight and listened to the guests. He
was accustomed to lie in the darkness and enjoy Laura’s
parties through closed doors.</p>

<p>Georg had not always been so lonely.</p>

<p>Just after the divorce, whilst Laura still felt her position
to be delicate, she had cultivated the ladies, well knowing
that it is they who make one’s position. Then she availed
herself of every opportunity to pose as a deserted mother
with her little baby. But her baby grew up and the ladies
bored Laura. Nor did they feel very much drawn to
Laura. It was not that she made any mistakes. On the
contrary, at first she was very careful about her reputation.
But she made her friends restless in some way. They did
not like to see her entertain their husbands. They gradually
held aloof. Only the eccentrics and the bohemians
among them remained faithful to her, including a fashionable
woman sculptor and a middle-aged baroness who wrote
causeries on the fashions.</p>

<p>Thus there were mostly men at Laura’s little parties.
She realized this with a shrug of her shoulders, a contented
shrug. As a matter of fact she always felt at home with
men. But little Georg was not an additional attraction
for them. He was still exhibited now and then as an almost
newborn babe. But in the end the sweet little baby grew
too long in legs. And then Laura began to keep him
out of sight. She came to think of him more and more as
a tiresome encumbrance. She even grew ashamed of this
reminder of her age and of her past. Georg was under
the care of untidy, uncontrolled and incessantly changing
nurses. When Laura was travelling she boarded him out
with strangers wherever she might happen to be. And
when she entertained he was put to bed to be out of the
way.</p>

<p>Laura had resumed her work in front of the mirror.
As the delicate task advanced towards the finishing touch
with the powder puff and the choice of perfumes and jewels,
her serious expression grew in solemnity.</p>

<p>Her movements became more deliberate like those of
an officiating priest. All these pastes, creams, essences
and perfumes were sacrifices and incense in a secret cult.
The dressing table was the altar and the image in the mirror
was the god. And just as a worshipper at the altar
ponders over the past and questions the future, so it was at
her dressing table that Laura became absorbed in recollections
and sought inspiration for her future plans. Her
face thus participated very intimately in all she did. When
she thought of herself it was quite naturally of her hair,
her mouth, her eyes, that she thought. Her egoism flourished
under the spell of the mirrored image. The shadow
and the reality merged imperceptibly together. She was
sitting at the high altar of feminine selfishness.</p>

<p>Then Stellan arrived, dressed in a dinner jacket. He
stepped without ceremony into the holiest of holies, patted
Laura approvingly on the neck, and threw himself down
in an empty chair beside the dressing table. You could
scarcely have seen that he was over thirty and that his life
during the last years had been rather stormy. His face
still bore an expression of self-satisfied, smiling irony.
Only the corners of his mouth had set, not into earnestness,
but into hardness.</p>

<p>Sister and brother had not met during the whole summer.
Laura tore herself away from the mirror with an
effort. She looked at her brother searchingly. It was as
if she looked in vain for something in his face:</p>

<p>“And now you have become a balloon pilot, too,” she
said, with a shrug of her shoulders. “How did you get that
idea into your head?”</p>

<p>Stellan played with a small lady’s watch of about the
size of a sixpence.</p>

<p>“Well, I did it in anger. I had to sell the Ace of Spades,
and it got into the papers. So then I found a way of cutting
out the cavalry. They look simply ludicrous down
below on their horses.”</p>

<p>Laura did not answer Stellan’s smile:</p>

<p>“Do you know what I thought when I read about your
folly?” she said. “Oh, are his affairs in such a rotten
state?” I thought.</p>

<p>Stellan frowned:</p>

<p>“No, dash it all, don’t think it is a subtle form of suicide.
Rather then as a new phase of my notorious passion
for gambling. I must have excitement. It is a game
with a rather higher stake than usual, that’s all....”</p>

<p>“Well, but how are your affairs?”</p>

<p>“My affairs,” said Stellan with a shrug of his shoulders.
“I have no affairs, only debts. But they are of no importance
anyhow. Just sufficient to keep me from getting fat.
They keep one up to the mark.”</p>

<p>Stellan’s financial position was bad. And still his superior
airs were not all pose. He did not worry over his
position. If he had done that he would have been lost.
It never occurred to him to refuse himself anything; on
the contrary. He, Stellan Selamb, must of course live up
to his position. The best was, of course, always for him
and his like. It is an enormous source of strength to have
such an inborn conviction. Because you usually get what
you consider should as a matter of course be yours.</p>

<p>It was this elegant microcosm of upper class prejudices
that kept Stellan afloat.</p>

<p>Laura looked at her brother with something almost resembling
admiration. His assurance, his elegant bearing,
his haughty smile, impressed her:</p>

<p>“There is an easy solution,” she said in a significant tone.</p>

<p>Stellan suddenly looked bored. He understood only too
well what Laura meant. The great day of settlement was
approaching when he would have to produce the heiress
in anticipation of whom he had drawn so many bills.</p>

<p>“Damn it,” he muttered, “you too! My colonel attacked
me the other day and asked if I did not mean to get married.
He must have heard something alarming. And do
you know what that idiot Ohrnfeldt said the other day when
I got him to indorse a note for me? ‘It is your duty as an
honest man to marry a rich girl,’ he said. Not bad, what?
I am a positive enigma to those honest souls. They think I
have let several fine chances slip through my fingers.”</p>

<p>“Well, but why do you neglect those ... chances?”</p>

<p>“Ugh, it goes against the grain to do what everybody expects
me to do. I think it is ridiculous.”</p>

<p>Laura did not answer. She resumed her task at the
mirror. There is all the same something artificial in Stellan’s
recklessness tonight, she thought, not without anxiety.
Because she also had lent him money. Not much,
certainly, but more than she would like to lose.</p>

<p>Stellan sat silent a moment staring at the absurdly small
lady’s watch, which seemed to have absolutely nothing to
do with anything so serious as time. Then he rose as if
he had suddenly noticed what time it was:</p>

<p>“I suppose Manne is coming tonight?” he said.</p>

<p>“Of course.”</p>

<p>“Good ... Laura, you must see that one of your financial
friends backs his new bills. Manne must have money.”</p>

<p>“Yes, because if he has any money, you will get some
too. Isn’t that so?”</p>

<p>“Well, Manne still has delightfully bad luck at cards.”</p>

<p>The guests began to arrive.</p>

<p>Laura’s home was a meeting place for some younger
financiers and a certain set of officers introduced by Stellan.
Great interest was shown at Laura’s in aristocrats in
financial difficulty. And sometimes the play was high.</p>

<p>Laura was a charming hostess at these highly original
men’s parties. She enjoyed queening it over these men
with a future or a past. She flirted gaily and without sentimentality
with both Mars and Mercury, with a secret
leaning towards Mercury. Yes, in the company of these
moneyed men Laura was perfectly at home. She enjoyed
the cool rapid talk of investments and bargains in shares.
Their lightning estimates and calculations gently stimulated
her. She was buoyed up and sustained by these speculative
chances. She constantly swayed between pleasant
irresponsibility and instructive calculations. Her cool
and sparkling head exercised, in the last resort, a natural
and easy domination over her senses. She played with
bold assurance, with her womanliness as the stake.</p>

<p>Yes, Laura liked gambling, but she liked winners still
better, winners who understood how delicately to share
their gains. Since she had observed that her fair type made
a special impression on Jews she had deliberately begun
to cultivate “the little black boys” as she called them.
This was the period of the first national industrial boom and
“the little black boys” were making larger fortunes than
ever. Because whatever happens in the world it is sure to
make the Jews wealthier. And Laura kept to the fore and
was given many a helping hand and many a hint which she
did not neglect to use to her advantage. People thought
that she liked to risk small sums for the fun of the thing,
but secretly she carried an a systematic and extensive business
by which she had collected a not insignificant fortune.</p>

<p>The last comer in Laura’s circle was Jacob Levy, the
lawyer.</p>

<p>Levy was a business lawyer, still quite young, but obviously
a man with a future. He had a large, but finely
chiselled nose, dark brown eyes and thin, ironically curled
lips. His was an international face, a face which seemed
as if for generations it had stared itself tired in all the markets
of the world. Though born in Sweden, Levy spoke
with a certain accent. His father was a Danish Jew and
his mother came from Poland. The ancient Swedish title
of his professional rank seemed incongruous in him. He
was a cosmopolitan, and money and the hazards of money
were his real home and country. Behind his mask of pale
indifference lay a passionate will and a cool, sharp observation
which sometimes got the better of him. In the
most impersonal tones he would utter extraordinarily insolent
truths, which sometimes cut straight across his own
interests.</p>

<p>Laura liked those truths, which had not yet however, been
directed against herself.</p>

<p>Stellan did not share his sister’s taste. He detested Levy
and treated him with an icy cold rudeness, which only
seemed to amuse him. They emphasized their respective
vocations as officer and lawyer and indulged, of course in
most general terms, in exquisite sarcasms at each other’s expense.
To keep to the general is often the best way to offer
personal insults. In the beginning the atmosphere was a
little chilly and depressed at Laura’s first dinner of the
season. Financiers sat stiff in a corner and looked as if the
State Bank had raised its rate, and the military kept to themselves
and discussed promotions and the damned journalistic
moles. The hostess herself hovered about with a
little frown on her brow. Perhaps it was Stellan’s irritation
that infected the others. He was not the only one
waiting for Manne von Strelert, everybody was saying,</p>

<p>“Wasn’t Captain von Strelert coming tonight...? I
hope Manne won’t fail us tonight...!”</p>

<p>Good old Manne seemed to be a special attraction! At
last the cavalry arrived in all its glory. The talk at once
became livelier and gayer. Everybody chatted and laughed
round the tall young officer with the careless and mischievous
eyes. Though not a wit there was nevertheless a certain
distinction in all that Manne said. He was especially
characterized by a kind of good-tempered acquiescence in
his Fate. He was capable of anything impossible and was
always game. He realized that somewhere within him there
were numerous possibilities but it never occurred to him to
try to develop them. In his aristocratic helplessness he
had a certain likeness to those race horses which are so tall
that they can never feed themselves. They simply cannot
reach down to their fodder.</p>

<p>Manne von Strelert’s character was summed up in two
prominent and widely appreciated fundamental qualities:
he could not say “no” and he had a wonderful, glorious,
never-failing bad luck in gambling. To this it should be
added that for some time past the owner of Kolsnäs found
himself in an embarrassing financial position. Is it then
strange that all eyes lit up around him and that tonight he
was the greatest attraction at Laura’s dinner?</p>

<p>Stellan occasionally reproached Manne in gentle and
almost flattering tones for his extravagance. He had during
the course of years won somewhat large sums of money from
his old messmate and childhood friend. And tonight he
simply could not help winning more.</p>

<p>They had dined early so as not to be disturbed in their
play. Manne took the hostess in. That evening she
courted the army.</p>

<p>Laura’s manner varied entirely according to the category
of guests in which she happened to be moving. She
preferred to take her financiers one by one, and whatever
was said openly had often a hard metallic ring about it.
But with her officer friends she displayed a special abandon.
With them she was the personification of reckless
gaiety. Her playful coquetry, and her light-hearted, infectious
laughter at once threw open the gates to a paradise
of irresponsibility and golden unconcern. Yes, she
could be quite delightfully gay, Laura, a veritable <i>saute
marquis</i> and <i>vogue la galère</i>.</p>

<p>Finance did not mind this apparent neglect and watched
for an opportunity to grind its own little axe.</p>

<p>Manne von Strelert was not the man to resist any kind
of seduction, least of all Laura’s. He soon began to drink
her health, in all sorts of drinks, and to make a series of
perfectly absurd little speeches in her honour.</p>

<p>Laura frankly enjoyed the admiration, both coarse and
refined, of her hair and shoulders, of these connoisseurs of
horses and women. But in the midst of the laughter and
toasts her eyes now and then searched Levy and Stellan.
Nothing had been arranged beforehand. But it so happened
that they had every reason to be pleased with her.
There was surely—hang it all—no harm in her enjoying
herself to the full with dear old Manne, who at this moment
seized an opportunity of pressing her hand under
the table.</p>

<p>Dinner was over and the party was just rising from the
table when Manne noticed some little pink shells that had
been brought in as ashtrays. He filled one with the last
drops of his champagne:</p>

<p>“One more toast,” he exclaimed! “A toast for the little
pink shell and the eternal line of curve.”</p>

<p>And with his hand Manne indicated round his lady a
very significant wave line.</p>

<p>Laura pushed back her chair and stood there with her
bare white shoulders and a seductive smile. She lifted
her soft arms as if waltzing.</p>

<p>“Yes, I appeal to you, gentlemen, am I not round?”</p>

<p>“Indeed, indeed,” sighed Manne and kissed her shoulders.</p>

<p>“Then you must see how one of our youngest Parisian
painters has imagined me,” she laughed. “I made a little
trip there a few weeks ago....”</p>

<p>All eyes turned upon Levy for a second. They knew that
he also had been to Paris a few weeks ago. He looked
quite unconcerned.</p>

<p>“The most modern art is like an unshelled chestnut,”
he said. “Green and full of prickles.”</p>

<p>“I look like a starved green skeleton with mauve-coloured
frost bites,” Laura interposed, eagerly, with her cheeks a
little flushed.</p>

<p>“I told the great master that it was not kind of him to
make me so angular. Then he bowed and said: ‘Art is
free, Madame, and on this occasion it has not been able
to take any notice of your roundness.’ Yes, that’s what he
said. But come with me and look at the masterpiece for
yourselves.”</p>

<p>With the whole troop of laughing men after her Laura
ran through the yellow drawing room into her little reading
and writing room where she had hung the curiosity.
She opened the door quickly and almost stumbled over
something that lay across the threshold.</p>

<p>It was Georg. He had crept out of bed to peep at the
party through the keyhole and had fallen asleep at his
post. He lay there dressed only in his outgrown nightshirt
and with black streaks across his knees from his
stockings. There was an air of sad neglect and helplessness
over the whole emaciated little figure.</p>

<p>“Who the deuce is that kid?” laughed one of the men,
who did not know that Laura had a child.</p>

<p>Laura grew rigid for a moment, but quickly recovered
herself and assumed as well as she could the pose of the
tender-hearted mother. She lifted up the boy, wrapped
him up as decoratively as possible in her shawl, and
kissed his cheek. And at this kiss from his mother Georg
awoke in the midst of the glorious party. Still half asleep,
he threw his arms round her neck and whispered something
out of his dreams: “Mummie ... princess all the
same.”</p>

<p>Everybody politely applauded the group. Only Levy
was silent. He stood alone and stared obstinately at
the famous picture, which nevertheless was tame compared
with the geometrical excesses of some later
schools.</p>

<p>“Hm ... frost bites,” he mumbled in a low voice. “Perhaps
there is something in the frost bites all the same....”</p>

<p>His voice sounded quite impersonal, as if he had not
known what he was saying.</p>

<p>Laura carried off the boy quickly. She did not stop in
the nursery. From there they might hear. No, she went
all the way to her own bedroom. There she let loose her
anger. There she suddenly began to pinch and beat the
disobedient child who had torn away the veil, betrayed, and
exposed her. It was as if she had wished to take her revenge
for all the annoyance, and all the worries he had
caused her from the moment that she was first conscious of
his presence in her womb. It was as if she wished to take
her revenge for all the memories from Ekbacken, which
seemed to her unspeakably oppressive and outworn.</p>

<p>“You were told to stay in bed!” she panted. “Why don’t
you obey? I shall smack you if you don’t obey!”</p>

<p>Georg did not scream. He shrank under the blows and
glanced horrified at his mother. He did not understand.
Oh, how the pretty rings hurt when she beat him. And
just now she had smiled and kissed him. He did not understand.
His little soul was full to the brim with strange and
ghastly questions....</p>

<p>The memory of this terrible contrast was to remain with
him all his life.</p>

<p>Laura suddenly felt ashamed and stopped beating him.
She felt a sort of gratitude that he did not scream, and she
led him back to his bed as if nothing had happened.</p>

<p>“There, go to sleep now,” she said in a tone of indifference.</p>

<p>And then she went back with her most charming smile
to her guests.</p>

<p>Play started. They did not start playing cards at once.
First of all they gaily laid their stakes at roulette. Laura
was banker and imitated the professional croupiers’ cry:
“<i>Faites vos jeux! Rien ne va plus!</i>”</p>

<p>Laura always had phenomenally good luck, and all laid
their stakes as if it were a tribute due to the hostess.
Then they began to play whist or bridge, which had just
become fashionable, in order to pass on to écarté or vingt-et-un
later on.</p>

<p>Stellan from the very beginning appropriated the well-primed
Manne. It was interesting to see the two friends
together at the card table. Manne was no gambler. He
threw down his stakes with reckless optimism and with a
boyish challenge to Fate. And he swore a little in evident
surprise each time he did not win. Stellan on the contrary
was a born gambler, at once cold and passionate. Nobody
who saw him at cards could fail to see that this was his
great vice. His excitement showed itself in a slight pallor in
his smooth, distinguished features, from which everything
else seemed to slip away as from a polished metal. A blue
vein pulsed in his hard clear forehead. He spoke shortly
and sharply, and unconsciously raised his voice as if he
had been surrounded by deaf people. Forgetfulness, slowness,
or bad play drew forth his biting irony. He himself
had an astounding memory for cards and a keen sense of
observation. He took the game as seriously as if it were
a science, and he jealously guarded it as a precious joy
which a gentleman should know how to invest with a
certain cult. He impressed you at one and the same time
as an expert and custodian of chance. Thus he developed
in his friends a real devotion to play which concealed from
weaker heads among them its dangerously exciting and
undermining viciousness.</p>

<p>During the course of years the stakes had grown bigger
and bigger. They started now where formerly they had
ended. Stellan won, but never enough. So it was today
again. It was usually not difficult to pluck poor Manne.
But just now he had had a little spell of absurd good luck,
which had decreased Stellan’s winnings. And Stellan had
to have cash. He then made a plunge, drove up the stakes,
doubled five times!—ten times!! One after another the
bids fell. Before Manne could turn around Stellan held in
his hand three thousand-crown notes and a cheque for five
thousand.</p>

<p>Levy had already finished playing bridge. He never
played anything else. Now he was standing by their table
looking on at the final spasms.</p>

<p>“What’s this, Kolsnäs is not entailed?” he suddenly
asked in an indifferent tone. It seemed as if he had
not understood himself the impertinence of the question.</p>

<p>Stellan expected a scene, but Manne was not his usual
self tonight.</p>

<p>“Oh no,” he muttered, “it is waiting for God’s chosen
people.”</p>

<p>“Why not just as well only for propertied people,” Stellan
cut in.</p>

<p>Manne rose. He suddenly looked sober and slapped
Stellan on the back.</p>

<p>“You are difficult tonight,” he said. “Now I must have
a whiskey and soda.”</p>

<p>The art of losing gracefully never forsook him.</p>

<p>Stellan leant back in his chair and puffed hard at his
torn cigarette. He felt his winnings like a cool shiver in
his limbs.</p>

<p>Levy was still standing beside him with a pale smile:</p>

<p>“Shall we two play a little?”</p>

<p>“I am rather tired.”</p>

<p>Levy raised his voice so that he should be heard all over
the room:</p>

<p>“Are you so anxious to keep your winnings?”</p>

<p>Stellan grew pale with anger and had a sharp answer
ready, but then it struck him that he might just as well be
engaged when Manne came back for his revenge. He
forced himself to a polite gesture towards the empty chair
and Levy sat down.</p>

<p>They continued with écarté and, against Stellan’s wish,
the stakes were high. This was something so unusual for
Levy that everybody gathered around them.</p>

<p>Now Stellan had no longer a sunburnt, cursing country
youth opposite him. Over his cards he saw a pale immobile
mask. It was the pallor of a race fifty generations
removed from forest and field but for whom calculation is
second nature. Yes, it seemed as if he had the very soul
of money pitted against him. He felt all the time that his
winnings were insecure and that he would inevitably lose.</p>

<p>Levy sat there with half-closed eyes as if half asleep,
and in the end won from Stellan all that he had won and
more into the bargain. He had seen that his opponent
was not at ease, and that he had had to win that evening.
And that is exactly the time when one is most likely to
lose. Levy had only to wait till he had won enough in the
ups and downs of the game. Then he proposed higher
stakes than Stellan could afford. Then it was Stellan’s turn
to rise from the table and take a whiskey and soda.</p>

<p>“How can you find anything in this miserable gambling?”
Levy scornfully flung after him.</p>

<p>Then he kissed Laura’s hand and drove home with the
thousand-crown notes and Manne’s I.O.U. in his pocketbook....</p>

<p>It was late. All the guests except Stellan and Manne
had already said good-bye. Laura yawned openly. But
Manne insisted on staying and would not go.</p>

<p>“Laura dear, do let me stay till six. Only till six when
my horse is groomed. I must mount him a moment before
... before ... oh, good God....”</p>

<p>Laura knew what was coming. Manne was going to be
sentimental. The situation no longer had any novelty.
She had an irresistible longing to go to bed and with a
mocking curtsey entrusted Manne to the care of Stellan,
who never slept after a night’s gambling. Then she withdrew.</p>

<p>And as Laura sat in her lace nightdress and pink silk
boudoir cap and counted out her neat little winnings on the
eiderdown, Stellan and Manne lounged in their easy chairs
in front of the fireplace. The fire had gone out long ago.</p>

<p>The dawn was raw and dismal. Half-emptied glasses
with lip marks and thumb marks, cigar ash and stinking,
saliva-soaked cigar ends were everywhere. And then the
pitiless sharp grey light peeping in through the blinds and
the cold anguish of the dry air itself in a room where
people have worn out their nerves with barren excitement.</p>

<p>On the carpet lay a torn knave of spades grinning at
them.</p>

<p>Manne began to talk about “the Glove.” He always
did at this time of night.</p>

<p>“The Glove” was Manne’s pet name for a plump little
lady who had a glove shop in Regeringsgatan. For a long
time she had kept Manne at a distance and he had been
forced to purchase and make presents of an incredible number
of pairs of gloves in order to win her favour. And
now marriage with her was not the most impossible of dear
old Manne’s eccentricities. He was unfaithful to “the
Glove” now and then with ladies of his own class, but he
always returned to her, disappointed and full of remorse.
Her diligence, thrift, wordly wisdom and other bourgeois
qualities had for him an exotic attraction, the whole charm
of the incomprehensible.</p>

<p>Manne tried to kick away the knave of spades and looked
appealingly at Stellan with his boyish, humid eyes.</p>

<p>“If you only knew what a woman she is! Damn me if
the tears do not come into my eyes when she sews on my
buttons. And I had promised her not to gamble again!
What will she say when I tell her this?”</p>

<p>Stellan sat there shivering and sleepless, with the worries
of tomorrow like poison in his veins and nerves. He
was sick of Manne’s sentimentality. It was as if a night
frost had fallen on their friendship:</p>

<p>“Why the devil do you tell her?”</p>

<p>Manne smiled a pathetic smile:</p>

<p>“You don’t understand, Stellan. I can hide nothing
from her. I can’t. I should go mad at once if I did. She
is my reason and conscience, you know. We won’t go just
yet, Stellan. It isn’t six yet. And I must ride a little
before I talk to her....”</p>

<p>Manne poured out a glass of soda water and swallowed
it in one draught:</p>

<p>“Ugh!” he said, “how awful it all was!” And then he
suddenly began to talk about old Kolsnäs, about his father,
the late chamberlain, who had taken part in the battle of
Dybböl, and about his poor little shivering mother with
her sewing basket and screen and fires well into June. And
he talked about their long battle on the lake outside Stonehill
and about their riding trips in the Backa forest.</p>

<p>“Do you remember it all, Stellan? Those were fine
times, weren’t they, Stellan? My old home. It is a
damned shame. What have I done with it all now? I
am a traitor. Yes, a traitor. Curse it!”</p>

<p>Stellan, cold and numb, felt a shock pass through him.
Was this how matters stood? Was it as bad as that with
Kolsnäs?</p>

<p>“What nonsense are you talking?” he muttered.</p>

<p>Manne stared anxiously at him:</p>

<p>“Stellan, old man, it ... you had better not go to the
bank with my cheque ... not tomorrow, anyway....”</p>

<p>“Why not?”</p>

<p>“Because there is nothing there, not a farthing.”</p>

<p>“You ought to have told Levy that. He won it from me.”</p>

<p>For the second time a shock passed through Stellan, as
he pronounced Levy’s name. But Manne sank back in the
chair staring straight out in front of him:</p>

<p>“I shall have to clear out,” he muttered, half crying.
“Tomorrow I shall have to get away. What will ‘the
Glove’ say?”</p>

<p>Stellan was again cool, tense, fully awake. He was one
of those people who do not know the meaning of melancholy
or remorse. Their egotism is so rounded and complete
that such things do not touch them. Neither can they
admit defeat. That would be the end of their world.
Adversity to them only points forward to new opportunities
to be seized.</p>

<p>Levy wants Kolsnäs, thought Stellan. Once again he
sat there, tense, cool and collected with the blue vein throbbing
in his forehead just as if the table and the cards were
again before him. Levy wants Kolsnäs, that’s as clear as
daylight.</p>

<p>Each time he thought of Levy he felt as if he had been
pricked by a spur. He hated Levy, and during these
moments he was learning a great deal from him. What
was it Levy had said? “How can you find anything in
this miserable gambling?” Yes, that’s what he said.
Things which had seemed impossible before seemed all at
once self-evident, final. Yes, of course, that’s it, he thought.
I’ll trick Levy and save myself.</p>

<p>He suddenly looked Manne steadily in the eyes:</p>

<p>“Do you know what it means to write cheques like that?”
he asked. His tone was so sharp that poor Manne was
startled.</p>

<p>“No...!”</p>

<p>Stellan blurted out the worst:</p>

<p>“Prison, old man, if you don’t find the five thousand
by the time the banks open. Can you do it?”</p>

<p>“No, it is impossible.”</p>

<p>“I’ll try to get you the money, but on one condition—that
you won’t let Levy have Kolsnäs.”</p>

<p>That was a condition that the astounded Manne agreed
to with all his heart.</p>

<p>“No, because I think I know of a better buyer, if you
really can’t keep the estate. That’s agreed then. You
take your ride and confess to ‘the Glove’ and I will go
and hunt for the money. We meet outside the bank at
half past nine. Good-bye!”</p>

<p>Stellan called a cab and drove straight to Selambshof.</p>

<p>Peter the Boss was of course impossible at Laura’s
parties. But there was all the same a secret channel of
communication between her drawing room and Selambshof.
Peter, too, had his interests in society.</p>

<p>Stellan opened a window, climbed in and sat down on
the edge of his brother’s bed. He looked like a fat hog
when he was asleep. On the night table lay an old silver
watch, a cash book and a half-finished cigar. Peter
jumped up and rubbed his eyes:</p>

<p>“What the devil is the matter?”</p>

<p>“Business. Kolsnäs is ripe. What will you give me
if I get it for you for five hundred thousand?”</p>

<p>Peter was not quite awake yet, but he could always manage
to appear indifferent at first.</p>

<p>“Damn Kolsnäs,” he rattled, lighting the half-smoked
cigar.</p>

<p>Stellan opened both windows. He also looked supercilious
and indifferent. From his manner you would have
thought he was the master, rolling in money, and Peter the
servant.</p>

<p>“Don’t talk nonsense,” he cut in. “You know you want
Kolsnäs like dear life.”</p>

<p>Peter felt a mixture of fear and secret admiration for
his brother’s brilliancy and his careless way of handling
money. Stellan was, as a matter of fact, much more difficult
to trick than he had believed. Peter held nearly all
Stellan’s shares in Selambshof as security, but he didn’t
own them and there was a damned big difference between
the two things. But now this fine gentleman must surely be
in a difficult dilemma as he came so early in the morning.</p>

<p>“You seem to imagine that I lie dreaming about Kolsnäs
since you come whilst I am still in bed,” ventured Peter
cunningly.</p>

<p>“I come from one of Laura’s shows. It was there I
saw this opportunity. The matter is urgent. Levy is after
the estate. What do you offer?”</p>

<p>“Well, five thousand!”</p>

<p>Stellan laughed aloud:</p>

<p>“Ridiculous! I want fifty thousand.”</p>

<p>Now it was Peter’s turn to laugh.</p>

<p>“You are mad. You have no idea what a big sum fifty
thousand is.”</p>

<p>“Fifty thousand. Not a farthing less.”</p>

<p>Peter began to dress. He tried to do so slowly.</p>

<p>“I’ll send Thomson to Manne.”</p>

<p>“Good! Thomson will be kicked out.”</p>

<p>“I’ll go myself.”</p>

<p>“You’ll only see me. Manne will settle nothing without
me. He has a horror of business.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll give twenty thousand.”</p>

<p>“Good. Levy will get the estate.”</p>

<p>“Thirty thousand.”</p>

<p>“Fifty, not a farthing less.”</p>

<p>Peter whined, reproached Stellan for his extravagance,
dwelt upon the fabulousness of the sum and his own miserable
means. Meanwhile he calculated quickly and surely
and arrived at the result that anyhow it would be a good
stroke of business.</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose I shall have to present you with fifty
thousand to spend on champagne and gambling.”</p>

<p>Peter sounded quite broken-hearted. But Stellan was
not at all touched. He even demanded five thousand
in cash. And as soon as Peter had produced the notes
he made off as quickly as he had come so that Peter sat
there and did not know what had really happened, and
believed it was some fine new way of robbing him of
some cash. But Stellan returned and in three days the
whole business was settled.</p>

<p>Manne had, on Stellan’s advice, turned to the estate
agent, O. W. Thomson.</p>

<p>“Thomson has good connections with my brother, who
might reflect on Kolsnäs,” he said. “But it is better to
choose an indirect way, because you must not appear too
keen.”</p>

<p>At Manne’s request Stellan was present at these transactions.
That is to say, at all except the last and decisive
meeting. For by then he had already got his fifty thousand.
And he thought that Manne might as well bear the
responsibility himself if there should be any trouble.
The result was that Peter seized Kolsnäs for four hundred
and fifty thousand only by threatening to withdraw at the
last moment—offensively simple.</p>

<p>Poor Manne was both sad and happy when it was all
over. He was ashamed to mention the fifty thousand to
Stellan and thanked him warmly for his help.</p>

<p>When drawing up the contract he had, by criminal negligence
and ignorance, completely forgotten to safeguard
the interests of the people on the estate. And this was
very hard on a number of old tenants and dependants who
had now no refuge but the workhouse.</p>

<p>He had spoken a true word of himself that night:</p>

<p>“Traitor, traitor to his home and to the soil that had
nourished him.”</p>

<p>And so it happened when Kolsnäs was thrown into the
market in Laura’s drawing room. It was not the first
estate that had suffered such a fate, nor would it be the
last.</p>

<p>This affair had scarcely become known before Laura
came rushing into Stellan’s room. She was furiously
angry.</p>

<p>“You have behaved abominably” she cried. “You have
acted behind my back. Why was I not told anything?
I had almost promised Levy that he should be allowed to
do Manne that little service.”</p>

<p>Stellan made no effort to defend himself. He atoned
for his crime by giving his sister a beautiful bracelet of
brilliants. There were several of Laura’s jewels that had
their little history.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">II<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">PETER THE BOSS IN LOVE</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">One warm and calm Saturday evening in July Peter
sat alone in his office and examined his books.
Round about him Selambshof seemed deserted.
Not a single soul had been visible the whole afternoon.
But far away from Kolsnäs on the other side of the lake an
accordion was heard. They were dancing in a barn and
everybody was there.</p>

<p>Peter puffed aloud. He cursed the low, mellow, rich
sunshine and the still air in which so many small winged
creatures were hovering about! With his massive body
he felt alone and helpless. He had often felt so of late.
And then there was practically nothing else but the books,
the soiled, faded Selambshof books up on the shelf by the
fireplace, to busy himself with. But Peter did not look
only at the books of the current year, he went back several
years. Their soiled columns constituted his excursions
into the past, his diaries and memoirs. Here there were
entries and totals at which he had always smiled contentedly.
In his memory they were associated with all those
who had let themselves be cheated by him in one way or
another and sometimes he had the feeling of being amongst
good and faithful friends. Yes, there are many ways of
fighting loneliness in this world.</p>

<p>Today Peter was more than unusually obstinate with
his books. He had already penetrated so far back in the
books that the handwriting was not his own scrawl nor
that of Inglund’s but a soft elegant handwriting with almost
sensuous curls and flourishes. It was Brundin’s
beautiful handwriting, which still made Peter feel sick.
He tried for the hundredth time to enjoy the stale sweetness
of victory. But it did not bring him joy. He still had a
queer feeling that Brundin had cheated him of something
... something that Peter the Boss would never
enjoy.</p>

<p>Then a woman dressed in white came tripping gaily
across the lawn, a plump little lady dressed in white with
a big white bundle under her arm. She disappeared round
the corner of the kitchen. Peter put out his head through
the window and called out:</p>

<p>“Hallo! There’s nobody at home there! Come in here
instead!”</p>

<p>Peter looked very surprised when the woman with the
bundle came to the door of the office:</p>

<p>“Upon my word, it’s ... isn’t it Frida?”</p>

<p>She answered with fluent tongue:</p>

<p>“Yes sir, it’s Frida right enough. I have the new laundry
at Majängen now—Frida Öberg, Laundress—No.
5, Solbacken. Here is the bill. Excuse my bringing the
laundry at this hour, but I had promised it on Saturday.
There is no change here at Selambshof, I see.”</p>

<p>Peter stood with the bill in his hand, staring at the laundress,
who had begun to pick collars, cuffs and starched
shirts out of her bundle. How strange that it was Frida he
was staring at, Frida of Brundin’s bedroom. That white
and soft creature he had one night caught a glimpse of
from behind the blind in the bailiff’s wing. This then was
the Frida of his timid, oppressive, light-shy boyish dreams.
There she stood, well preserved, smiling, insinuatingly
plump, equipped with such charms that not even the
simplest country yokel could help noticing them. Suddenly
she was enveloped by a warmth as from hot irons, thought
Peter. And far away at Kolsnäs they heard the accordion
again tuning up a dance. Then he felt a sudden furious
desire for movement, to make a noise and jump about with
somebody in his arms. And he seized one of the shirts
and waved it about:</p>

<p>“I hope you have washed the wedding shirt well?” he
cried out almost menacingly.</p>

<p>“Why, are you going to get married, too?”</p>

<p>“Yes, this very moment, if necessary. Don’t you hear
the wedding music? Shan’t we take a turn, we two?”</p>

<p>With the shirt spread out before him he jumped about in
a sort of grotesque dance, threw his great arms round Frida
and began to jump about whilst the wedding shirt still
flapped about them. The worn floor-boards groaned under
Peter’s weight, the dust rose high and the flies buzzed away
frightened from the paper ball below the lamp in the ceiling.</p>

<p>Frida defended herself laughingly when Peter wanted
to kiss her:</p>

<p>“No, I must go now, sir.”</p>

<p>Peter stood perspiring and nervous and withheld the
money for the bill:</p>

<p>“Won’t you have a look round old Selambshof for a
moment? There isn’t a soul at home. I reign alone here
now. Come along.”</p>

<p>He pulled her with him up to the main building and, eager
and flushed, piloted her through the dusty closed rooms
where the old gloomy and worn-out furniture slept and
dreamed evil dreams in the heat and twilight.</p>

<p>“It is so cursedly quiet here tonight,” exclaimed Peter.
“Can’t you laugh a little again so that I may hear what it
sounds like?”</p>

<p>Frida laughed, but the echo came back hollow and scoffing
from the depths of the corridors. Then they entered
the green smoking room off the hall, which resembled a
thousand other smoking rooms in so far as it contained
an equipment of guns, deers’ horns, elks’ heads and stuffed
birds. Peter seized the opportunity to impress upon her
what a wonderful Nimrod he was and what an expert on
the secrets of animal life, especially of animal sex attraction.
He imitated the call of the capercailzie, he described
the feathers of the mating ruff and its collar of feathers
and finally he imitated the night call of the ruttish elk
and its stamping so that it echoed through the whole of
the empty house. Meanwhile he drew nearer and nearer
to the door of the next room where he slept in the summer
because it was so much cooler there than in his own wing.
But when Frida saw that they were approaching the bedroom
she wisely stopped on the threshold and not even the
wildest and most seductive bird-calls could make her penetrate
further. No, now she suddenly remembered that she
ought to have met a friend long ago. She thanked him
for all the kindness he had shown her and insisted on going.
Then Peter became furious and reproached her coarsely
for her behaviour with the bailiff:</p>

<p>“If that blackguard was good enough, I ought to be too—don’t
you think so?”</p>

<p>A hard look came into Frida’s eyes and she hissed out
as if testing a hot iron with her wet finger:</p>

<p>“I should like to tell you, sir, that I am on my own now
and don’t need to listen to anybody.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be so high and mighty. It was I who managed
things so that you escaped examination when Brundin was
caught, because I was sorry for you.”</p>

<p>Peter had no proofs at all that she too was involved in
Brundin’s frauds, but he always seized an opportunity of
boasting of his kindness and of threatening a little. Frida
was not at all frightened. No, but she was too worldly-wise
to issue a challenge to money and power.</p>

<p>She therefore contented herself with lying in a humble
tone about the whole affair:</p>

<p>“No, I had nothing to do with that scoundrel, sir.
And besides a poor girl can’t understand all that men
do....”</p>

<p>By now Frida had already backed out on to the stairs
and as soon as she felt safe she at once adopted her most
seductive manner again:</p>

<p>“I hope I may iron many wedding shirts for you, sir,”
she said, and curtsied and smiled and tripped gaily away,
white, plump and coquettishly swaying whatever was capable
of being swayed.</p>

<p>Peter stood on the stairs mumbling curses after her.
Then he climbed breathlessly up into the observatory and
watched with his glass to his eyes where she would emerge
from the avenue into the road. He followed the white
little figure in the twilight till it disappeared in a strange
black house up on the ridge of the hill over Majängen.</p>

<p>A woman had entered the life of Peter the Boss. He
was in love, positively in love with Frida Öberg, owner of
the Majängen Laundry, No. 5, Solbacken.</p>

<p>Peter had never been able to associate with decent women.
He was frightened of the “guinea hens,” as he called
them. He grew nervous and hot from the unaccustomed
effort of not saying anything coarse or mingling curses
with his speech. He even felt a sort of fear of his sister
Laura. Once many years ago she had dragged him into
a set of Lancers and that was one of his most awful memories.
Even today he felt a shiver down his back whenever
he saw a dress suit. Thus it is clear that Peter’s
erotic experiences were of the simplest. They were all
lost in the fog that lies between the revels of the evening
and the sore head and sordid regrets of the morning.</p>

<p>But now he was in love, but it was a delight mingled
with not a little worry and anxiety. From the very start
he felt love as a threat to his purse. He had anxious little
suspicions that he was now more susceptible to cheating
than before. For the first time he had to be on his guard
not only against others but also against himself. “Ugh,
this will be an expensive business,” he thought, when the
longing to see Frida again came on him. She is no fool,
that little witch! She won’t do anything for nothing. He
positively endowed her with a calculating cunning and a
mysterious seductive self-interest. But the more difficult
and dangerous he made her, the more he must love her.
Peter the Boss suspected a soul akin to his own.</p>

<p>He made up his mind not to appear too eager. No, I’ll
wait till she brings the laundry again, he thought. But
time passed, until he could not wait and began to hover
about Majängen.</p>

<p>It was not exactly a pleasure to walk about there. There
were no decent roads, but only heaps of stones and clay
holes, for the company had long ago sold all the sites
and had thus no interest in fulfilling its vague promise
as to the construction of roads. Besides, the inhabitants
of Majängen were unpleasant people. All the earliest purchasers,
honest workingmen and small tradespeople, who
had bought the ground and built upon it at too high a price,
had been forced to leave their marsh-dwellings. In their
place a floating population had found its way out to Majängen.
The worst scum of the town population was to be
found there. And Selambshof and Peter the Boss were not
exactly loved by them. They rightly considered that it
was his filth they had to wade in up to their knees and that
it was on his heaps of stones they almost broke their legs.</p>

<p>So that when in his rosiest and most gentle dreams Peter
wandered about there, he was perturbed by expressive
glances, tightly clenched fists in trouser pockets and long,
rude oaths at the house corners. And in the windows
there teemed pale and dirty children who took their fingers
out of their mouths in order to point at him as the bad man
from Selambshof.</p>

<p>All that would not have mattered so much if Peter could
only have caught a little glimpse of his beloved. But he
never saw her outside in the clay, no plump smiling face
showed itself above the window curtains of the laundry
up in the “asphalt” house. Thus he had christened the
big two-storied ramshackle house half way up Solberget,
because it was covered with asphalted cardboard outside the
boards, and none of the successive owners had been able
to afford to repair the outer boards, so that it remained
there as black and dismal as it had been three years ago.
And it was confoundedly difficult to get to it, for there
were only steep narrow wooden steps leading past the entrance
and Peter could not climb up and down them all
day long in order to steal a glance through the window
panes.</p>

<p>“Life is hard,” thought Peter, “you never meet those you
want to meet.”</p>

<p>In the end he went home and wrote a letter. There are
many ways of interpreting one’s feelings. Peter’s was not
very personal because his eloquence was based on a lover’s
advertisement in a newspaper and of course any mention of
marriage was carefully avoided. And somehow the handwriting
was not quite his. And he did not sign it Peter
Selamb, but “Frida’s own Elk.” That is what he did.</p>

<p>“Never put your name unnecessarily to any document...”</p>

<p>The answer came by return post and was both pleasing
and disquieting. Frida wrote that she was doing well and
did not need to bow down to anybody, but that she might
find use for a new Laundry stove of the Orion make and a
blue silk coat with white revers. And then she allowed
herself to hint at the possibility of further sympathy.</p>

<p>Peter fully realized the risk of payment in advance, but
he also understood that without some magnanimity he
would make no progress at all. So with a swimming
head he sent a round sum for the two objects aforesaid.
At the same time he wrote that he had found a little refuge
well protected from the eyes of the world where they might
meet and sympathize. The refuge was Stellan’s flat. Stellan
had been ordered North again, much to his annoyance,
and Peter had charge of the keys. He now hurried to the
elegant little two-roomed flat in Karlavägen, removed the
name plate, aired the rooms, put away all Stellan’s belongings
into the wardrobes and sat down to wait.</p>

<p>Frida arrived dressed in the new blue silk coat and with
the whole warmth of the new Laundry heater of “Orion”
make around her.</p>

<p>“I always keep my promises,” she whispered, “I’m made
that way.... But goodness me! how smart this is. Are
you living here too, Sir?”</p>

<p>“I have taken all this for your sake, Frida,” said Peter
pressing her to him. “It has cost me a good deal.”</p>

<p>And then at last Peter got his reward....</p>

<p>He lived in supreme well-being in a world of peace.
Late on Sunday morning, long after Frida had stolen home,
he lay quite still and watched the sunlight creep across the
beautiful Persian carpet. It was a strange feeling of relief,
it was as if it was only now that he had at last given
the <i>coup de grâce</i> to the nightmare of his youth, the stubborn
Brundin.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>If Peter imagined that Frida now belonged to him, without
any further expense, he was mistaken. A few more
such moments and she considered herself free again. And
so she let him understand in a delicate way that new favours
had to be bought with new offerings. Peter suffered, but
he suffered more in his greed than in his affection. He was
so accustomed to think that everything depended on money
that he could scarcely imagine a man being loved for his
own sake. He puffed and whined—but paid. He did not
even try to press down her demands by simulated indifference.
Such is love.</p>

<p>So things went on for a few months. Then one fine day
Peter received a letter in which Frida herself proposed a
meeting without mentioning any fresh gifts. He was just
about to welcome her, feeling heartily content, when he
was checked by an inward shock. He suddenly remembered
some land he had once bought when the seller in apparent
absentmindedness had registered the transfer in his own
name instead of the purchaser’s.</p>

<p>It was the only time he had ever been completely taken
in.</p>

<p>Peter read through Frida’s letter again. It was too eager.
It was not quite the same old Frida. He felt a slight presentiment
of something unpleasant. A voice whispered in
his ear to be on his guard. He knew what it all meant.
He sat long and worried in front of the clean sheet of note
paper. In the end he wrote something about important
business which prevented him from meeting her just then.
After this extraordinary exercise of self-control Peter felt
very sorry for himself, so much so that the tears came into
his eyes. He wandered about puffing and sighing among
the fields of Selambshof, a victim of desire, suspicion, hope
and fear. Into the bargain Stellan wired that he was coming
home immediately from the North, so that Peter was
obliged with a bleeding heart to screw the name-plate on
to the door again and set out all the photographs of horses
and ladies. Thus the discreet little free retreat for his
amours disappeared from view. Then another letter from
Frida arrived in which she begged and prayed to be allowed
to see her own Elk very soon. Peter was really touched.
It was sweet to hear her beg like this. All there was of
hunger and love in his great body stirred within him. But
he felt at the same time that the thing was growing more
and more dangerous. “I must be strong,” he thought, “very
strong.” And he did not answer the letter, not a line....</p>

<p>Peter was not left long in doubt. It was as he had suspected,
Frida was expecting a child. She absolutely must
see him, she wrote. She was so ill and so run down. If
he did not arrange things for her at once she would drown
herself....</p>

<p>Peter sat long staring at the letter and it did not affect
him in the way he would have thought. Instead it rather
comforted him in a strange way. It cooled his desire to
think of her growing more and more unshapely and ugly
every day.</p>

<p>“Oh no,” he muttered, “you won’t drown yourself. I
have paid for what I have had. We are square. It is high
time for me to return to my senses.”</p>

<p>The long tug of war between his love and his purse had
ended in a victory for the purse.</p>

<p>Peter burnt all Frida’s letters and did not answer a word.
He had decided to regard the affair with Frida as a dream.
And he knew he could do it. There was not a trace of
proof. So wonderful was the instinctive cunning of this
man that he had not sent a single line signed with his name,
written in his own handwriting, or even posted at Selambshof.
And scarcely once had he been seen in Frida’s company.
She on her side had from the first had every reason
to keep the matter secret, because a liaison with the hated
Peter the Boss would at once have driven away all her
customers in Majängen.</p>

<p>But Peter was not to escape as unscathed as he had imagined.
Frida was not at all the sort of person to allow
herself to be hanged in silence. For a time she continued
to bombard him with letters, full of entreaties and reproaches.
Then she began to hang around Selambshof,
big, swollen, with a sinister spotted face and awful to see.
Peter kept a sharp lookout and succeeded for a long
time in avoiding her. But one winter evening she suddenly
confronted him in the avenue. Peter did not even greet
her, but walked on as if he had not noticed her. Then she
seized him by the sleeve and poured over him a wild flood
of curses and threats. There were no witnesses. Peter let
the flood pass over him with great calm—yes, positively
with a kind of enjoyment. Only now when he heard her
voice and saw her body did he feel the child as something
real. And in his innermost heart he no longer doubted
that it was his. No, it was almost a pleasure to think how
something of himself was irresistibly developing within
her. He enjoyed that sensation with the last cruel glowing
spark of his love. But his voice was low and ice-cold
when at last he answered her. And he spoke slowly as
if he wanted to impress something for all eternity upon
her consciousness.</p>

<p>“Not a farthing,” he said. “Take from what you and
Brundin stole. From us you have had enough.”</p>

<p>With that he shook her off and went away.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Frida ceased to hover around Selambshof. She adopted
new tactics. She stayed at home in Majängen and talked.
There was no longer any truce of silence. To everybody
who came she opened her heart concerning the scoundrel
at Selambshof, who would not do the proper thing.
As the unhappy victim of Peter Selamb she won much
sympathy and many new customers in Majängen. Her
laundry was besieged by the women and became a sort of
focus for the hatred of Peter the Boss. The whole community
waited excitedly for the Spring Sessions.</p>

<p>But a good deal was to happen before then, and Peter
would have several reasons for reflecting on Majängen this
winter.</p>

<p>There was the old business of the water supply. It had
been decided after several stormy meetings that water was
to be laid on in the houses at Majängen. It was necessary,
because the wells were insufficient and tainted. Part of
the necessary money had already been collected and then
Peter’s permission to lay down the pipes was sought. It
was considered to be only a matter of form. The streets
were of course his, but even if he did not fulfil his promise
of making roads it never occurred to anybody that he would
deny the people he had humbugged facilities for the pipes.
But that was exactly what Peter did.</p>

<p>“The ground is mine, and if you want to put down
pipes you will have to pay for them,” he said.</p>

<p>This answer was unworthy of Peter the Boss. It could
be no pleasure to have a hotbed of epidemics just outside
your door. He acted in direct opposition to his own
interests. But it is a fact that one hardening of the heart
brings in its train others. He was furious with everything
that was brewing against him in that dark <i>charnel</i> house.
And he hated to think of the coming Spring Sessions. And
that is why he said “No,” an obstinate, sullen, impossible
“no,” which, as we have said, was quite unworthy of the
cleverness of Peter the Boss.</p>

<p>This was too much. The newspapers then got hold of
him. The reporters were about to catch the mood of the
winter twilight. They described the horrors of the outskirts
of the town, the struggle between town and country,
tearing each other to pieces in an indescribable chaos, the
bottomless roads, the ragged hillside, the torn pines, the
maimed, squinting, hunchbacked, cold-sweating, ramshackle
houses. And in the midst of it all came the Salvation
Army to their red barn with “Blood and Fire” over the
cross on the door. “Starvation and Frost” were everywhere
and thus the symphony was complete. Here hope,
misfortune, idleness, thrift, crime and the new life thronged
together. Here the scum that the town had cast out huddled
together with the indomitable spirits that boldly sought a
new life on new ground. And just now when all the good
influences were co-operating, after a pathetic struggle, in
an united effort to make something worthy of human beings
out of their grey stone hill everything was brought to nought
by the mere word of Peter Selamb. Who was this gentleman
after all? Well, he was the manager of Selambshof.
He sat there in his sinister highwayman’s lair and took
toll from the citizens of the town and grabbed all the land
that the town required. We are suffocating, we want air,
we want to get out! Very well, please pay up. Everybody
must pay toll to Peter Selamb of Selambshof.</p>

<p>People did not choose their words. The newspapers
outdid each other in indignation. They were of course
right. But it is not always well to be too much in the
right—not even for a newspaper—</p>

<p>The hammer blows rained down with a frequency sufficient
to fell an ox. But Peter merely blinked his eyes.
He did not understand how anybody could be afraid of
the press. He had no real respect for any other kind of
letterpress than that which is to be found on bank-notes
and in the paragraphs of the penal code.</p>

<p>“Do these damned journalists want to teach me how to
build suburbs?” he muttered with an almost compassionate
shrug of the shoulders. And he did not budge an inch
on this matter: “The ground is mine. If they want to
put down pipes, they will have to pay.”</p>

<p>After a few weeks the newspaper campaign against Peter
the Boss subsided. It had had no effect.</p>

<p>As for Frida, things took their course. It is seldom that
the birth of a child has been awaited with such general
interest. The women in Majängen talked of nothing else
when they met at the wells, laboriously to pump up the
grey and ill-flavoured clay water. Round this child the
hopes of the whole community for vengeance on Peter the
Boss were centred.</p>

<p>At the end of March, Frida Öberg gave birth to a son,
who was named Bernhard.</p>

<p>And then Peter received a summons to appear before
the Court and he arrived in a grey suit in his dog-cart with
old “Interest.” And when he came he appeared neither
haughty nor humbled.</p>

<p>The Court lay by the high road some distance away from
the suburb. But all Majängen was of course there. The
crowd stretched out as far as the yard. Peter stepped forward
with half-closed eyes and a good-tempered grin on
his face. Nobody could say he looked frightened. He
slapped some of the men on the back:</p>

<p>“Make room, boys, nothing is going to happen without
me, anyhow.”</p>

<p>A Swedish crowd is harmless when it is sober. People
stared and made way. But a coarse voice was heard:</p>

<p>“He ought to be hanged....”</p>

<p>Peter had now reached the hall. On the other side of
the long table with the judge and the jurymen sat Frida.
She had a bundle in her arms. She stared Peter straight
in the eyes and lifted up the child so that he should really
see it. Then a murmur passed through the hall and the
jurymen put their close-cropped heads together. Peter
turned away his eyes at once, shrugged his shoulders, and
bowed to the judge as if to say: “As between gentlemen,
cut the whole thing short.”</p>

<p>Through his friends he had conveyed to the judge the
truth about Frida Öberg: An easy-going wench, maid at
Selambshof, an affair with the fraudulent bailiff, dismissed
with him, vengeance, blackmail, etc.</p>

<p>The baby began to cry. Did Frida pinch it for effect or
not? The judge, who looked as if he were at a meeting
of shareholders, glanced up from his papers with a
wry face:</p>

<p>“Is it necessary to bring the child here?”</p>

<p>Frida jumped up, grateful for this opportunity to make
a demonstration. “What am I to do when I am poor
and alone, sir? I have nobody to look after the poor
boy.”</p>

<p>The judge remarked in a dry voice that he had been
informed she had a laundry and that her sister was working
with her.</p>

<p>At last the summons was read and the judge began his
questions. When Frida once began to speak, she could
not stop, but flung herself with such a primitive force and
such a naïve matter-of-factness into the dismal love story
that the judge at once thought it wise to order the hall to
be cleared.</p>

<p>Peter grinned with malicious pleasure as the angrily muttering
inhabitants of Majängen shuffled out.</p>

<p>When Frida had finished, Peter rose, looked at the wall,
and stoutly denied everything.</p>

<p>Then a witness was called. Peter suddenly recognized
with a certain discomfort the porter at Stellan’s house.
Well, it appeared that he had never seen them together,
but only believed he had noticed that they both stayed on
the second floor. Peter was calm again. He had won
worse cases. Then the judge showed him a love letter
signed “Bull Elk,” on the reverse side of which there
appeared a part of the Selambshof receipt stamp. Peter
boldly denied everything except the stamp. But he began
to feel rather glum.</p>

<p>The parties were dismissed during the deliberations of
the Court. Frida sat in the midst of a crowd of women
and suckled the baby. But Peter went out and patted old
“Interest.” He stood there stroking and stroking and found
it difficult to look up. He felt hate all round him like
something prickly. He no longer felt safe. He would
probably have to resort to ... the last ...</p>

<p>After a long delay all were admitted into the Court again.
It was black with people but absolutely silent. The oath
was taken.</p>

<p>All eyes were fastened on Peter the Boss. He seemed
to shrink and grow smaller as he stood there. Now he
looked like an old bent and grey peasant. Would he do
what peasants had been accustomed to do so often before
in similar cases?</p>

<p>Peter stepped slowly up to the table. He felt just as
if he were walking in a vacuum. He seemed to be paralysed
in the arm when he wanted to place his hand on
the Bible, the greasy old court Bible, which had seen so
many things. He could not help glancing at Frida. She
also had risen and taken a step towards the table. She
looked at him with an expression in which hatred and
anxiety mingled with a strange cold curiosity. The child
also stared at him with vacant black eyes. And a little
hand moved with awkward, blind jerks. Peter suddenly
thought of a newborn, trembling young fox which he had
once pulled out of its lair and killed with the butt end of
his gun. He felt queer, sick. He was afraid ... afraid....
For a moment he let his hand fall....</p>

<p>The judge fixed him with his eye:</p>

<p>“Well, what’s the matter? Can’t you take the oath?”</p>

<p>Peter started. He suddenly heard Stellan’s clear sneering
voice:</p>

<p>“Clodhopper! In love with an old servant girl, what?
Ridiculous!”</p>

<p>He placed his hand on the Bible again. The judge recited
the oath with the expression of one who had been
offered at dinner hare that was too high. Peter repeated
it after him. He wanted to speak quickly, but he could
only get the words out slowly. His voice was thick and
indescribably humble and there was in him something of
the fat rat and the lascivious dog.</p>

<p>Frida had been quiet, surprisingly quiet during all this.
Then her voice was suddenly heard. There was no cry,
no sob, no longer any affectation:</p>

<p>“He swore false all the same.” And it sounded like a
weary statement of fact.</p>

<p>With that the case was finished and the defendant was
acquitted of responsibility for the child. The judge muttered
something to the Clerk of the Court and the jurymen
next to him. Nobody in the hall moved. Peter was the
first to go out, straight past all the amazed, loathing and
disgusted faces that stared closely at him. He staggered
out into the cool, dazzling April sunshine. He stood there
fumbling with the reins and patting old “Interest’s” back
and muttered inanely:</p>

<p>“How have things been with you, old girl? How have
things been with you? They have been playing hell with
your old master, really hell.”</p>

<p>Peter got up in his dog-cart and drove with slack reins
down towards the point where the road to Selambshof
turned off. Then he suddenly heard behind him a prolonged
shrill, strident whistling, a sound that seemed to be
pure venom.</p>

<p>It was a greeting from Majängen. It was the signal of
a long and bitter guerilla war.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Peter had won his case—but he felt all the same confoundedly
dismal. He could eat nothing for dinner, though
he took a couple of appetisers. And things did not improve
when Stellan rang up. Fancy he had heard of it
already. He was absolutely furious:</p>

<p>“Scandalous,” he cried, “grotesque—that sort of thing
should be settled on the quiet. You are a damned clodhopper,
you make us all impossible.”</p>

<p>Peter put down the receiver, hurt, sad, almost ready to
cry. “Abuse,” he thought, “nothing but abuse. And all
the same it was really for Stellan’s sake that I ...
swore....”</p>

<p>With the coming of dark, Peter began to be frightened.
He could not forget all those eyes staring at him in the
hall. And every one of them knew that he had forsworn
himself. Perjury! What did that matter now, when nothing
could be proved. He had put his hand on the book
and repeated what that damned judge—who as a matter
of fact was a rake in financial difficulties himself—had
said. But he, Peter, had not asked to lay his hand on the
book. It was the Court that had forced him into entirely
unnecessary folly. Anyhow he had certainly won his case.
Why the devil then should he have to lay his hand on the
book? The book, the book ... Peter suddenly felt cold
inside. The old terror of his childhood rose out of the
depths of the past and seized him. He had of course never
felt anything so noble as an honest doubt. He had never
felt any sort of contact with the powers for which the Bible
stood. A little piece of Kristin’s and Hedvig’s hard old
God, the centre of Selambshof’s gloomy crippled terror,
still survived deep down in his soul beneath the rich flora
of lies and dishonesty. “So help me God in body and
soul,” yes, that was what he had sworn. Supposing God
should punish him now! Supposing he were to take away
from him all that he possessed! Supposing he had to
sit naked, starved, and alone in the dark forest just as he
had dreamt as a child!</p>

<p>Peter was afraid of the God in the book, afraid as a
negro of his fetish....</p>

<p>Oh, if only he had had Hedvig to talk to. She knew
all about that sort of thing. She was the medicine man
who knew the appropriate spell...!</p>

<p>The clock had already struck twelve when Peter set out
to look for a Bible in the great dark owl’s nest called
Selambshof. From one room to another he walked searching
in every corner, but without finding what he looked
for. At last he crept stealthily into the housekeeper’s room
like a thief and stole her Bible from her night table.
Then he sat down to turn over the pages, greedily fastening
on everything that spoke of wrath and threats and punishment.
With swimming head and smarting eyes he made
himself drunk with fear. At dawn he staggered trembling
and shivering into the office and took a thousand-crown
note out of the safe. And he spread it out so that he
might really see how large it was. Then he put it in the
housekeeper’s Bible—at one of the worst passages....</p>

<p>That was the way out of Peter the Boss. He tried to
bribe God with a thousand crowns.</p>

<p>As soon as it was dark the following evening he stole
towards Majängen with the note in his pocket. It would
have been simpler of course to send the money by post.
But that was not good enough. The post is such a silent
and mysterious institution. He was afraid that his sacrifice
would go unnoticed by the Lord. And if he could
“bull” shares by his self-abnegation that would be all to
the good. So he would deliver the money himself—though
of course without witnesses. Otherwise it might be dangerous.</p>

<p>Peter crept forward in the rain with the brim of his
hat turned down and his collar turned up. It was really
bold of him to go to Majängen now, but he was not the
first whom fear has made bold. He slipped, stumbled,
and stepped into holes in the darkness on the bottomless
roads. Several times he thought he heard steps and whispering
voices behind him. But these sounds were at once
drowned in the soughing of the poor meagre pine branches
which were struggling against the storm somewhere up in
the darkness above his head. Now he would reach the
asphalt house in a moment. Black as misfortune it hung
there over the damp edge of the cliff. The laundry was
closed, but there was a light in the window. Peter was
just going to sneak up the long wooden staircase to reconnoitre
when suddenly there came something whizzing
through the darkness. It was a rain of big stones. Peter
drew back a step but was hit by the next shower in the
back just below the neck and also on the head. He fell
forward without a sound, and lay there in his own clay
like a sack of sand.</p>

<p>These were the first shots in the war between Selambshof
and Majängen. Fatal hits. Peter was after all on the
way to his woman and child. There was perhaps after all
just a chance of Peter turning human being.... But then
the stones intervened...!</p>

<p>Peter was unconscious and half suffocated by the clay.
The thousand-crown note still lay in his pocket and it never
reached its destination. He woke up in his bed at Selambshof.
And his first thought in the midst of all his pains
was: “That’s what you get for trying to do good...!”</p>

<p>Peter had to stop in bed quite a long time. He had
injured his spine. He got up again even more bent, more
pale and more flabby in the face than before.</p>

<p>He was now a man without pity. If Peter the Boss had
had before his sentimental moments, they were now a thing
of the past. And he had, as it were, grown too coarse
for all fear. And he procured for himself a watch-dog—a
great, shaggy, wolf-like monster—chiefly for the pleasure
of seeing people anxiously sneaking past Selambshof. And
then the harsh barking of the dog was a kind of company
at nights. For Peter had begun to find difficulty in
sleeping.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">III<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE ANGEL OF DEATH</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Hedvig’s and Percy’s marriage had for long been unconsummated.
At first in the Swiss mountain sanatorium
Hedvig was not allowed to live in the same
house as her husband. Later on when he was better she still
remained his nurse.</p>

<p>“Think of your fever,” she said, and withdrew gently
from his delicate approaches. “It is your duty to get well,
Percy dear.”</p>

<p>Percy was all too far away from the thousandfold stimulant
of art from which in his longing and his imagination
he had otherwise derived vitality. His natural submissiveness
was still further fortified by the strict discipline
of the sanatorium. So he yielded and always acquiesced
in her cold sisterly behaviour to him. But only to approach
her again at the next opportunity with the same persistent,
childlike, half-embarrassed supplication for love.
And if he had not done so Hedvig would certainly have felt
secretly hurt and worried. After having wandered about
the whole day in the pure cold air and in the light of
the white snow-capped peaks, among the brotherhood
of suffering and among the recaptured convalescents high
up in the seclusion of the alpine world it was pleasant
in the evening to whisper a soft “no” to the adoring husband.
There was rehabilitation in it. It healed old
wounds. It was an innocent triumph. She lived through
happy days. There was nothing that tempted or scorched
or tore at the heart. There was just life enough for Hedvig
Hill.</p>

<p>“No, Percy dear. For your own sake. Your temperature
would rise....”</p>

<p>And she uttered her “no” in the same tone as others
would whisper their “yes.” “See how I sacrifice everything
for you,” she seemed to say, “my best years, my womanhood,
my beauty, I sacrifice all for you, darling Percy.”
Even to herself she made a sacrifice of her half-heartedness
and her fear—though she probably suspected in her inmost
heart this unsatisfied longing of Percy’s was in the long
run more dangerous to him than ordinary life together as
husband and wife. The truth was that Hedvig Hill sipped
at what she did not dare to drink at one draft. She hugged
to herself the glimpse of pain she saw in Percy’s glance
after her refusal. She cherished the mist of pulsing blood
in his blue eyes, so like those of a precocious boy. And
she warmed her lonely bed with it.</p>

<p>Then one day came when Percy was—not cured, because
a complete cure seemed almost out of question—but anyhow,
so much better that he could think of moving about
in the world once again.</p>

<p>The doctors spoke of the south.</p>

<p>Hedvig felt a nervous dread of all that was to come.
It was as if they were being turned out of a safe refuge,
she thought. She would have preferred to remain amongst
the brotherhood of the doomed, bewitched by the mountain
spirits up there into a half-life in the big white monastery.</p>

<p>“But Percy, would it not be safer to spend one more
winter in the sanatorium?” she whispered.</p>

<p>Percy shook his head and smiled. He had been very
mysterious these last days; he had sent off and received
a number of telegrams.</p>

<p>“Where are we going? Wouldn’t it be best to go home?”
wondered Hedvig.</p>

<p>“You are going to have a magnificent present,” cried
Percy, who glowed with the pleasure of planning, acting
and moving about after years of supervision and inactivity.</p>

<p>So they went down into the valley when the first September
days had already sprayed the woods with gold. There
the train stood ready. The smoke, the noise, the jolting
about soon tired Percy, who was so spoilt with fresh air
and quiet. Then Hedvig turned nurse again, and wrapped
him up in their reserved compartment. But that evening
the train rushed into a town by the sea under the mountains.
It was Genoa and they at once went aboard a steamer
which seemed to have waited only for them in order to
depart.</p>

<p>“But where is this boat going to? Where are we going?”
wondered Hedvig.</p>

<p>She positively knew nothing. Percy only smiled mysteriously.</p>

<p>One brilliantly fine morning they went ashore at white
Cadiz.</p>

<p>“Here is my present,” said Percy. “It is the country
that suits your hair and your eyes.”</p>

<p>At the sanatorium Hedvig had forgotten to be Spanish.
She felt terribly nervous and cast out into the unknown.</p>

<p>“Now we will choose towns for you, just as one chooses
frocks,” continued Percy. “We shall begin with Seville,
though I suspect that Toledo would be the most suitable.”</p>

<p>So they arrived at Seville.</p>

<p>“I can’t offer you an auto-da-fé,” he whispered. “You
will have to be satisfied with a ‘corrida’.”</p>

<p>Above the entrance to the <i>plaza de toros</i> there stood in
big letters “Press Bull-fight in commemoration of the immaculate
conception of the Virgin Mary.”</p>

<p>With eyes that still smarted and burnt from all the pitiless
light on the yellow sand of the arena Hedvig saw
within a fraction of a second a little grey bull, with the
picador’s dart in his neck, bury his horns into the stomach
of the rearing horse. The horse beat the air helplessly
with his forefeet and lifted his slender neck and his head
with a gesture of wild, maddening pain, and then fell
heavily on one side with the picador beneath him, but only
to rush up again and to gallop, pursued by the bull, round
the arena with bleeding sides and trailing entrails.</p>

<p>Hedvig stared fixedly down. She was very pale.</p>

<p>“This is horrible,” she muttered. “I want to go.”</p>

<p>But she did not go.</p>

<p>More picadors, more bleeding horses. Then banderilleros
who, dancing nimbly, buried their flag-adorned darts
in the bleeding neck of the bull with subtle, playful cruelty.
Meanwhile the sunlight lay like fire on the yellow sand,
the red blood stains, and the bright shawls of the women
on the rails of the boxes. Even the rising metallic sound
of thousands of voices seemed to be burnt through by the
heat of the sun.</p>

<p>Then the <i>espada</i> entered. With his knee breeches, slippers
and pouched hair he seemed to have stepped straight
out of a Mozart opera.</p>

<p>Swinging his red cloth he dances an elegant Death dance
before he draws his weapon. Now everything gleams
bright, the sun, eyes, the thin fire-shaft of the sword. His
posture, as with his weapon raised to the level of his eyes
he calmly awaits the onslaught of the bull, is extremely
graceful. Now the fire of the fine tongue of steel is suddenly
extinguished in the bull’s neck, the Colossus staggers
and falls heavily.</p>

<p>Hedvig sat mute and pale with devouring eyes. She
was staring at the gate from which the next bull would
rush in....</p>

<p>When they drove home in the first yellow twilight Percy’s
arm stole round her waist.</p>

<p>“I believe all the same Toledo has amused itself in
Seville,” he smiled. “Wasn’t that a fine way of getting
the sanatorium out of the system?”</p>

<p>Hedvig pushed away his arm almost unkindly:</p>

<p>“Don’t laugh at everything,” she muttered.</p>

<p>And suddenly she felt a secret bitterness that the man
by her side was not stronger, more robust, more dangerous,
that he had allowed her to say “no” so often.</p>

<p>Darkness requires more heat than light. The sun, the
sight of blood, the inborn cruelty of the south had all at
once burnt through her shyness, her fear and her brooding.
Hunger for life buried its claws deep in this strange virgin
soul that had lain so anxious and so self-absorbed. She
was not the first barbarian from a twilight-land to whom
the south has given a bold desire to live.</p>

<p>That night Sister Hedvig became her husband’s lover.</p>

<p>They remained the whole autumn in Seville and saw
many bull fights. Hedvig was very beautiful at this time.
Hers was a dark passionate unfolding. Percy overwhelmed
her with costly clothes and jewels. He dressed her up as
a Spaniard with combs and shawls and mantillas. He
did not touch his paint brush, but he let her pose to his
love. And Hedvig enjoyed his admiration, enjoyed her
own beauty. For the first time in her life she was at
peace with her own body. It was no longer the cause of
restlessness and heavy care and danger. It took pride in
this man’s caresses. Beneath her silk and her jewels she
felt the glow of her nakedness. A solemn thrill would pass
through her at the thought of her own shoulders and breast.
And she enjoyed the feeling of satisfaction, which was both
hot and cold. Oh, what a relief not to feel any longer that
anxious longing in her inmost soul.</p>

<p>Hedvig Hill was happily in love with herself. For Percy
also these were happy days. Their late union gave his mind
a bright coolness. Perhaps he sometimes suspected the
gulf which nevertheless existed between them. But that
did not frighten a dilettante, it only now and then liberated
a certain light self-irony. He enjoyed his own extravagant
gifts, he enjoyed seeing her bloom in her own way under
his hands. He felt something of the cool intoxication of the
artist before his work when it has achieved independent life.</p>

<p>“You are my most beautiful picture,” he would whisper.
“I sometimes imagine I have done it myself.”</p>

<p>The time was far away when he had lain in the shadow of
Death looking at her with a beggar’s eyes. Percy Hill forgot
things easily.</p>

<p>It was the evening of a clear and brilliant October day.
The whitewashed walls no longer dazzled. Down in the
patio of the small hotel two Spanish matrons in black were
sitting talking with phlegmatic fire. Their talk flowed as
musically and as monotonously as the little spraying
fountain in the marble basin. Hedvig and Percy had just
returned from a long drive towards the <i>vega</i>. The coolness
of the approaching autumn suited him wonderfully well.
He stood leaning against the window frame with his hands
behind his head:</p>

<p>“Today I feel quite aggressively alive,” he said. “Fancy
if we should have a child, Hedvig. A little girl. I would
much rather have a girl than a boy.”</p>

<p>There was a slight touch of annoyance in his voice.</p>

<p>Hedvig sat at her dressing table doing her hair. She
felt a sudden unpleasant shock. Strange as it may sound,
she had up till that moment not thought of the consequences
of their life together, and not for a moment had she
thought of herself as a mother. She let slip the knot and
her black hair flowed again over her naked white shoulders.
She sprang up from the dressing table with a hard expression
and frightened eyes:</p>

<p>“I don’t want a child!” she cried. “Never, never!”</p>

<p>Percy wondered at her vehemence. His smile grew
hesitating:</p>

<p>“Dear child, forget my nonsense. It is bad taste to
foretell nature in that way. I only meant that I should
certainly find your condition beautiful.”</p>

<p>Hedvig had now calmed down again. She came up to him
and stroked his hair:</p>

<p>“You must never talk like that, Percy,” she muttered.
“You ... we have no right to children ... they are for
those who are healthy...”</p>

<p>And her face had suddenly resumed the old expression
of sisterly resignation and self-sacrifice.</p>

<p>Percy grew a shade paler. It seemed as if the climate
had suddenly grown more chilly. It seemed as if the light
reflected by the white walls had been reflected by snow.
The sanatorium had followed even to Seville.</p>

<p>“Forgive me, I forgot for a moment that I was an invalid,”
he said.</p>

<p>From that day Hedvig suffered constant anxiety lest she
should have a child.</p>

<p>Woman’s egoism is more negative than that of a man—it
is a real minus quantity. For she reveals her sacrifice and
her devotion in the very lines of her body. Her whole
body is a manifestation of generosity, a splendid promise.
From the day that her breasts fill out, invisible childish
lips grope round them. Within the sweet swelling lines of
her body and lips slumber the forces of regeneration. Her
egoism is a barrenness, a cowardly self-betrayal, for she
betrays her own body and she betrays the future...</p>

<p>Of course Hedvig was convinced she had the noblest motives.
Of course it was the curse of heredity that frightened
her. She did not admit even to herself that she would have
been still more frightened had he been a healthy man, that
it was her own body she was beginning to fear again and
this time not with a vague and indefinite fear as before. No,
now she knew what was at stake. At any moment there
might begin to grow within her a strange being that would
feed on her blood, would tear her body, would perhaps
bring death to her. She grew cold with fear at the least
disquieting sign. She had moments of hatred of her husband.
And she began to behave with a meanness and nervous
caution that deprived their life of all its charm.</p>

<p>Percy yielded. Probably it was criminal of him to hope
for children.</p>

<p>He did not see through his wife, or at least only half saw
through her. There were perhaps dark moments when he
suspected the cowardly poverty of her character, but people
of his type do not pursue disagreeable thoughts to the end.
All the same Percy relapsed into a restless state. He
felt as if he had been exiled from the kingdom of peace
and health of which he had only had a glimpse. He left
Seville and began to lead a roving life in Spain and the
south of France. Galleries, ruins, mountains, waterfalls.
It was the same old hunt for beauty! Several times he
tried to stay in one place and take up his paint brush again.
But these were only good intentions, interrupted by crises
of discouragement. Towards Spring they reached Paris,
for which he had all the time been longing. Percy settled
in Montparnasse amongst the Scandinavian painters and
talked art with feverish and excited interest. Here he suddenly
fell victim to the modern extremists, to futurism,
cubism, naïvism and ultra-expressionism, on which he had
formerly only bestowed an ironic curiosity. It seemed as
if his very refinement and submissiveness had rendered him
defenceless against the latest brutalities. He began to buy
the crudest objects. The strangest things were sent to their
studio on the Boulevard Raspail. There was a “Portrait of
a Lady,” consisting of four straight, black-green lines on a
pink ground. There was a picture called “Motion” which
consisted of four triangular fields containing parts of a
woman’s leg and a locomotive.</p>

<p>Percy looked stealthily at Hedvig when with eager
explanations and cold enthusiasm he showed her these
acquisitions. “I am not happy,” his look said. “This kind
of art is not for happy people. It is for those who have
something to avenge.”</p>

<p>They were, as a matter of fact, so many reproaches flung
in the face of life because he was weak, enervated, sorely
tried and without a future.</p>

<p>Hedvig had suffered all the time from his new associates,
among whom she felt helpless and embarrassed. She was
jealous of all the strange, poisonous indecency that they
called modern art. She stared silently at the new monstrosities.
Very well—he prefers all this to me, she thought.
It did not merely hurt her. She had also a strange, suppressed
feeling, never admitted, but nevertheless real, of
becoming free, of slipping out of his hands; a throbbing,
secret, insolent feeling that anything was possible. But
with all this there immediately blended an anxious care, an
old frightened care as old as the Selambshof days, which
stirred within her every time he gave her expensive flowers,
bought first-class tickets or threw a big silver coin to a beggar.</p>

<p>“What have you given for those pictures?” she asked
defiantly.</p>

<p>He mentioned a large sum, several thousand francs.
And she went into her own room with a pale face.</p>

<p>From this time Hedvig began to insist on their going
home.</p>

<p>But Percy continued to buy modern art. Everything was
not so provocative as those first pictures. There were also
pearls of bold but still exquisitely tasteful expressionism.
After running about all the day at exhibitions and art dealers
he sat down to drink his apéritif. He looked out over
the murmuring streams of humanity on the big boulevards,
which always make you feel that you are a poor little drop
in the ocean and may be washed away at any moment. But
all the same there came into his eyes a little look of anger.
And he did not turn to Hedvig, who sat there dressed in
black looking stiff and disapproving, but to the young painters
round the table. It was strange how the air of Paris
made him free and independent:</p>

<p>“It’s a pity it’s so damned banal to make a donation,”
he exclaimed. “But a poor wretch like me has no other
way out. I have no children. I won’t live very much
longer. I am an end and not a beginning like you boys.
My money has no personal future. But if I add a wing to
my little art gallery and fill it with first-class explosive
matter and then present the whole splendour to the nation
or rather to the city, yes, to Stockholm, then I shall at any
rate have sown the seeds of a little healthy restlessness in
their minds. And a little help to you fellows. And I
shall have erected a little monument to myself in the usual
dishonest but generally approved way. The Hill Collection!
What do you think of that idea?”</p>

<p>They grew excited round the table:</p>

<p>“We must thank you, of course! But why don’t you do
something yourself? You can, Percy! You are no
bourgeois! Why don’t you stick it out?”</p>

<p>Hedvig had been sitting all the time silent and forbidding.
At Percy’s unexpected mention of an endowment she
suddenly felt a cold shiver of anger. She rose quickly:</p>

<p>“You all seem to forget that Percy is ill,” she said. “He
must not be rushed. He is much too excited here in Paris.
Shan’t we go back home now, Percy?”</p>

<p>The young painters felt a little nervous of Mrs. Hill,
of her aristocratic air, her dark nun-like beauty. Silence
fell around the table. Percy rose with his little, absent-minded,
apologetic smile:</p>

<p>“Yes, there you see, gentlemen,” he said.</p>

<p>And then they left.</p>

<p>At last Hedvig succeeded in making her husband leave
Paris, where it was already beginning to be hot and dusty.
There is always an element of danger in the journey home
for consumptives who have been living in the south. In
Stockholm there had been an unfortunate relapse in the late
spring, with storm and icy rain. Percy had to go to bed at
once and Hedvig was again his nurse. He did not want
the doctor. He had a real horror of doctors and Hedvig
did not insist on calling one in. She took great care that
he should not be exposed to tiring visits of old artist friends
and she nursed him with quite, inexhaustible energy. There
was no more talk of the great donation and Hedvig began
to feel a certain deep calm.</p>

<p>But one fine day Percy got up in spite of all her protest
and in spite of his not having quite a normal temperature.
And the following morning an architect arrived. The two
men walked round the house, drew, measured and made a
lot of calculations.</p>

<p>“I want the drawings as quickly as possible,” Percy said
at lunch. “I am in a great hurry.”</p>

<p>His eyes glowed and he had little red patches in his
cheeks.</p>

<p>The architect promised to do his best.</p>

<p>Immediately afterwards the pictures began to arrive from
Paris. Not only those that Hedvig had already seen, but
a whole lot of new ones. Percy evidently had somebody
down there buying for his account.</p>

<p>Hedvig said nothing. She kept to herself, locked herself
in, brooded and scarcely answered when spoken to.</p>

<p>Still more new pictures arrived, and Percy was busy
with them the whole day, studying them, and moving them
from one crowded room to another.</p>

<p>Then the plans were ready and the workmen arrived, a
whole swarm of them. They dug and blasted, laid foundations
and built the walls. Percy sat in an easy chair out
in the sunshine and looked on. He was so eager that he
scarcely allowed himself time to eat. “This is my protest
against oblivion,” he thought. “I am building a house for
my ashes. I am building my own little pyramid....”</p>

<p>He really imagined his ashes standing in a beautiful
Japanese urn in a corner of the Hill gallery.</p>

<p>Towards autumn the roof was already on the new wing.
Percy began to hang the pictures at once. He could not
even wait till the walls had dried. He himself was not
strong enough to move anything, but he sat in his chair and
gave orders to Ohlesson, the coachman, who had now become
a chauffeur. You could see even from Ohlesson’s
back how he disapproved of these awful novelties. Percy
did not worry. Whenever he looked in at the rooms containing
examples of the older art, everything there seemed to
him strangely quiet and as it were covered over with a fine
dust. His taste was already brutalised by these strident
colours and paradoxical forms. He really needed strong
food now, poor Percy. Fatigue sometimes descended like
a grey mist over his feverish zeal. He used these new
excesses as weapons against the deepening shadows.</p>

<p>Hedvig walked about devoured by a silent consuming
bitterness. Her feelings were a strange compound of jealousy
of his overpowering interest in art and brooding
anxiety at his wicked extravagance. This donation seemed
to her like a challenge, like a theft from one who had sacrificed
herself for him. Percy had allowed himself to be
seduced, she thought. He has no power of resistance. But
she dared not speak openly to him. She had a vague feeling
that there was something within her that she must not
betray. That is why she never went beyond her increasingly
bitter reproaches that he overtired himself, and neglected
himself. She wore an expression as if the crêpe were already
floating round her. Yes, Percy thought sometimes
that she assumed her widowhood in advance. There was
something sharp and nervous in his answer:</p>

<p>“Why do you insist on wearing black?” he said. “I
should understand you much better in sealing wax red or
sulphur green.”</p>

<p>Her old method of holding him was no longer effective.
Hedvig again began to feel his lack of respect for illness
as a personal insult. By and by they almost quarrelled
about Ohlesson, the chauffeur. Hedvig began to drive into
town every day in the car. Then Percy would have no one
to help him, she thought. Then he would be forced to rest.
This made her a little easier. One day she did something
she had been tempted to do for a long time. She ordered
Ohlesson to drive to Selambshof.</p>

<p>The avenue was full of yellow leaves. Several of the old
trees had blown down and there were ugly gaps as in a
broken set of teeth.</p>

<p>Peter sat in the office puffing at an unlit cigar and looking
at his papers. He had aged. He was bent, his face
was flabby and yellow. Hedvig stood before him as Laura
had done once upon a time. She could not help having
been spoilt by so many beautiful and expensive things. For
a moment she shivered at the ugliness of her brother. But
in her inmost heart she tolerated him, had even a feeling of
security in the presence of something intimate and familiar.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Peter!”</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Hedvig. So the elegant Mrs. Hill visits
this remote spot. Why this honour?”</p>

<p>Hedvig did not answer but looked out through the window
with an expression of resignation.</p>

<p>Peter wore a look of injured innocence which suited him
perfectly:</p>

<p>“Is it perhaps for the last dividends? Because Levy has
long ago cashed them.”</p>

<p>Hedvig had, on Laura’s recommendation, appointed the
lawyer Levy to look after her personal estate, including her
shares in Selambshof. And Peter did not at all like the
insolent supervision of the Jew.</p>

<p>Hedvig shook her head.</p>

<p>“I am anxious about Percy,” she mumbled. It sounded
as if this confession had been forced out of her by a thumbscrew.</p>

<p>“Really, how—how is your lord and master, anyhow?”</p>

<p>On Peter’s face there appeared a well-meaning grin of
sympathy. He summoned up all that was left of his former
sentimentality, but it did not reach beyond his expression.
His eyes penetrated swiftly into her very soul with a cold,
familiar, insolently searching glance. “Aha, my dear,”
they seemed to say, “this business did not turn out so well
as you thought.” Hedvig, of course, stood in silent, dignified
protest against his every low thought. But all the
same she enjoyed his glance—something that groped
blindly and stealthily in her vitals.</p>

<p>“Percy is very bad,” she exclaimed in a kind of
exaltation, “much worse than he thinks himself. And he
has quite lost his balance. He does nothing but buy picture
after picture, mad things that unscrupulous people palm off
on him. He is positively throwing away all he has! It is
such a dreadful shame!”</p>

<p>Peter was playing with his pencil. He had never heard
Hedvig say so much at once before.</p>

<p>“You mean that Percy ought to be under restraint,” he
interrupted calmly. “I am afraid that would be rather
difficult.”</p>

<p>“I shall have remorse all my life if I do nothing to help
and protect him.”</p>

<p>Peter wanted to damp what he thought was unbusiness-like
vehemence.</p>

<p>“Pictures, you said ... but pictures can be good,
almost as good as shares. They give no dividend but they
can rise a damned lot in value.”</p>

<p>“No, not the pictures that Percy buys. He is being
robbed by real swindlers. And then he wants to give it all
away to the State. But they will never accept such rubbish.
People will only laugh at us.”</p>

<p>Peter was startled. A donation! This was damned
serious. He rose panting, walked up to Hedvig and poked
his thumb into her arm:</p>

<p>“You ... you ought to occupy Percy’s time a little
more,” he leered. “So that he won’t have any left for this
nonsense. Why the devil are you so black and white and
beautiful as sin?... And have expensive pretty frocks
and all that sort of thing.... The chief thing is that
Percy does not commit any folly while he is still ...
well, I mean that one can always protest against a
will....”</p>

<p>There was a certain satisfaction in Peter’s grunts. He
enjoyed saying this kind of thing to an elegant lady in
diamond rings and black silk. There was a sort of
luxurious revenge at last in being able to speak straight out
to Hedvig, the hypocritical Hedvig.</p>

<p>His sister did not push him away. She smelled his
breath, and the smell of stale tobacco and of cheese on his
old clothes. All the time she had the same feeling in the
pit of her stomach as one has when one sinks rapidly in a
lift. Now she had reached the bottom. She did not push
him away. She stood there with closed eyes without a
trace of colour in her face. She felt his shamelessness
groping with coarse, hairy hands about her reserve, her
shyness, and her stealthy and lying fear.</p>

<p>“How dare you!” she whispered in a low, hoarse voice,
“how dare you say anything so vile?”</p>

<p>But his words stuck all the same. They crawled about,
teemed and multiplied within her. They stimulated her to
action and emboldened her gloomy heart.</p>

<p>Hedvig staggered out of Peter’s hovel. She stood beneath
the naked, shivering maples on the soil of her bitter youth
and of her long humiliation. A dull consuming autumn
restlessness ran through her blood. The darkness of the
main building attracted her suddenly as by some secret
hardening of her heart. The door stood ajar above the
bank of withering leaves on the steps. She entered. Everything
was dim, dusty, cold, stuffy. She wandered about the
empty echoing corridors, turned the creaking locks, stole
through swarms of moths between the covered mirrors and
chairs and the windows which were specked with innumerable
dead flies. In her own room she sank with a
groan on to the edge of the old narrow bed of her girlhood.
Memories of her poor, lonely, miserable childhood rushed
over her with renewed strength. She felt a wild self pity, a
kind of fury clawing her breast. But she liked to feel
that claw. That was why she was here. She drained the
cup of pain to the last drop with voluptuous bitterness. It
gave her a right to revenge.</p>

<p>When, as if under the pressure of a dangerous burden,
Hedvig slowly staggered out again it was only to pursue
the past still further. She strolled through the neglected,
overgrown garden where the benches and the paths were
covered with dead stalks and the trees were already robbed
of their fruit. Here in the old pear tree beside the well
there was a big hole in which she used to hide her secrets—as
a dog hides a bone. There had lain for a long time a
broken seal out of the smoking room and a little ring with
a green heart that she had taken from Laura. In her
thoughts she still obstinately defended this theft: “Had
not Laura broken her fine comb? And not given her anything
in place of it!” How quiet and self-possessed she
had been as she sat there and Laura searched for the ring,
cried and stamped....</p>

<p>Hedvig cast a shy and searching glance around her.
Then she quickly pulled off her glove and pushed her hand
down into the hole. Her arm had grown plumper and it
was a little difficult to reach the bottom. With the tips of
her fingers she felt something hard and managed to pull it
up. It was a little bottle with a death’s head and cross
bones on it. There was still something thick and brown
at the bottom. It was a souvenir of her confirmation. She
had taken the bottle from the family medicine chest after
that affair with Brundin. In the darkness she often ran
down to feel it. It was death she fingered ... death ...</p>

<p>Hedvig stared at the sluggish brown drops. “It was that
struggle that made a nurse of me,” she thought with sudden
clear vision. “I had to finger—death. I was a fool.”
And seized by a wild mortification she flung the bottle on
the ground so that it was shattered into a thousand pieces.</p>

<p>Now Hedvig stepped through a broken-down hanging
gate into a road, from the rustling, leafy carpet of which
there was reflected a strange, sulphur yellow light which
seemed like the very shimmer of putrefaction. Not a
human soul was visible. It seemed as if Peter had devoured
the whole population. Next she stood on the cliff by The
Rookery where she used to spy on Laura’s and Herman’s
kisses. Oh, she could still feel her burning mortification
and her envy of her sister. Overhead the autumn breeze
soughed heavily in the dark pine tops. Out on the lake
sudden black gusts perturbed the surface as if in irresolute
fury. But the waves beat against the shiny green stones
on the shore with short, sharp onslaughts, already troubled
by the thought of the moment when everything would be
frozen up. Hedvig suddenly lifted her hands as if to ward
off a blow. The thought that Percy would soon die, that
she would soon be alone again, rushed over her with a
vehemence as never before. Alas! to know a thing is one
thing; to feel it in your heart and bones is another thing.
She felt a shivering fear of the old loneliness of Selambshof.
The autumn day, the decay all round her, the icy cold
shadow of death, suddenly awakened all the hunger in her
blood. The memories from Seville rose up before her
flame-clear on this chilly northern autumn day. Once more
they swept away her cautious fears and her anxious reserve.
She had a savage pleasure in standing there in the cold wind
and letting loose all the black hot gusts....</p>

<p>And deep, deep down in her soul there was during all
this seething turmoil the consciousness that Peter had given
his approval, that she had the sanction of the Selamb family
spirit for whatever might happen. Without that she might
never, never have undertaken this stimulating and fateful
excursion into the past....</p>

<p>They had late dinner at the Hills’. Hedvig came down
in her black Spanish dress, with her hair parted in the
middle and a high comb under the mantilla. She was as
stiff as an image of a saint. But she had a burning pallor,
and there was fire in her alluring black eyes.</p>

<p>The saint drank several glasses of wine.</p>

<p>Percy sat mute. He did not take his eyes off her and
trembled as if before some overpowering phenomenon of
nature. We are to begin again, he thought. It was not
dead. From the first moment he saw her there was no
thought of resistance in his mind.</p>

<p>When they were sitting over coffee in the yellow twilight
of the intimate little anteroom she suddenly threw her arms
round his neck and kissed him. He no longer wondered
how it had happened, or why it had happened just then.
He only revelled in his intoxication of joy, at once awful
and glorious. He had a strange feeling of starting on a
journey from which he would never return.</p>

<p>During a long, silent, dark autumn night she drank his
fever like a fiery wine. She was the intoxicated nun
officiating at the dark mass of love. Never had Percy
found her lips so greedy, so glorious and unashamed.</p>

<p>In the morning Hedvig played with Percy, as the cat
plays with the mouse. She stood there wonderfully naked
in the pale sunlight from the window. Never before had
she been able to show herself to him thus. There was in
the very lines of her body something wild and virginal,
a shyness which made the sight of her nakedness a sort of
breathless sacrilege. Percy had the sensation of beholding
a martyred girl who, with her clothes torn from her body,
awaits the fierce and hungry beasts on the yellow sands
of the arena.</p>

<p>“Today I need some air,” she said, “but I don’t mind
walking if you want the chauffeur!”</p>

<p>“May I not come with you?” whispered Percy from his
pillows. He looked so small in the big carved bed
resembling a catafalque. “Could we not take a long run
into the country to look at the autumn.”</p>

<p>That day Percy no longer spoke of his pictures, nor
during the following days either. Hedvig did not see him
even glance at the new gallery. He seemed to have grown
afraid of his plans for farewell, his pyramid, the urn for
his ashes and all the rest of it.</p>

<p>All Percy’s feelings had been transfused into a new,
passionate love. Day and night he wanted to be with
Hedvig. Protected by her white limbs he huddled together
in the growing shadows and intoxicated himself in the
warmth of her presence. But it was a fatal intoxication.
Love made everything, even death, greater, more real, more
terrible—. It seemed as if strong hands had torn to pieces
the bright artistically woven veil that dilettantism had suspended
between him and reality. He felt for perhaps the
first time in his life a deep fear. But then he only drank the
deeper from Hedvig’s unbroken life as if by doing so he
might save his own. And when he noticed that the intoxication
consumed his strength instead of increasing it then
he drank deeper still in order to benumb himself.</p>

<p>But now it was Hedvig’s turn to steal into Percy’s picture
galleries. Yes, the rôles were strangely reversed. She
positively felt attracted to her former chamber of horror.
She would stay there for a long time staring around her.
It was not that any artistic instincts had awakened in her.
It was not that she had begun to understand any of these
new paradoxes. No, but she imbibed courage from their
impudent recklessness. She deafened her conscience with
their excesses. “Everything is permitted,” that was what
Percy’s pictures whispered into the ear of a Selamb.</p>

<p>Life and death soar strangely near each other in love.
You give and take with the same recklessness. Sacrifice
and selfishness disport themselves side by side. And just
at the moment when the human egoism is nearest to its
dissolution it is sometimes most blindly cruel.</p>

<p>During these weeks Hedvig loved Percy and killed him.
There came a moment when she began to be afraid to look
into his face. But all the same she could not find the
strength to spare him. During the day she invented many
a cunning trick to escape seeing the truth. There was
something round his mouth and eyes which now and then
filled her with a cold terror, almost with hatred. It was the
disease in him she hated. She would feel fits of cruel
invincible hunger for the moment when death would at
last strike its blow and no longer creep stealthily around
them. And all the same she loved him, loved for the first
time in her life with a kind of dim, wild abandon. So
strange is the human heart. In the midst of these fits she
longed for the night, the darkness, the great, teeming, blind
darkness when she could once more draw him to her, kiss
him, drink up his fever.</p>

<p>Sometimes Hedvig was seized by a kind of dark frenzy.
Their love had resembled a silent bitter struggle with death.
Percy sank back with perspiring temples. Convulsively,
like, a drowning man, he would seize her black hair and
stare into her eyes, which he saw in spite of the darkness
and which seemed to him surrounded by pale little dancing
flames:</p>

<p>“My beautiful angel of death,” he whispered. “My
beautiful angel of death.” And in his voice was a strange
mixture of love, hopelessness and, to the very last, playful
irony.</p>

<p>One such night there came a fresh hæmorrhage of the
lungs. It was the third, and Percy knew at once that it was
the last. For several days he lay there white and thin and
faded away without any serious pain. The winter had come
early. The light from the snow on the pines lit up the
room just as in the sanatorium in Switzerland. The doctors
had that all-wise and important expression which
always means that they are completely powerless. Percy
had recovered his little, wan, ironical, submissive smile. He
did not complain and did not seem to regret anything. He
smiled also to his wife without wondering at her metamorphosis.</p>

<p>Hedvig had turned nurse again. Silent, indefatigable,
with the expression of painfully heroic resignation of her
profession she moved silently about his bed. Not a word
did they speak of what had passed between them. They
were like people who have become sober and who scarcely
suspect what they have done during their intoxication.</p>

<p>Until one day Percy wanted to be carried out into the
new gallery.</p>

<p>At first Hedvig objected vehemently. He was not to be
moved. He could not bear the least movement. Only
after persistent prayers did she give in to his whim, but
with an injured, worried expression. And she did not
leave him alone. Erect and rigid she stood on guard by
his pillow in the hall.</p>

<p>Here the dying Percy lay amongst all his new art. A
look of bitterness and weariness fell across his face. He
shivered a little. The walls looked around him indescribably
cold and unsubstantial. They seemed to radiate cold
and meaninglessness. The stiffness and perverse spasms
of the latest fashion in art gave him a terrible feeling of a
blighted life frozen in death.</p>

<p>“They can never have had a fire here,” he mumbled, and
crept right down under the bedclothes.</p>

<p>Hedvig was already prepared to have him carried back
to the bedroom. But then Percy caught a glimpse through
his half-closed eyelids of a little spring landscape, a hill
with apple trees in bloom against white walls. In the
midst of all the frostiness he received a lovely impression
of a pure motive, of a simplicity that was full of meaning
and of quiet appealing beauty. And he remembered again
his promises in Paris. They again seemed to him important
and binding. He took the picture with him and had it
placed at the foot of the bed when he was carried back into
his “crypt,” as he called his bedroom alcove. Tomorrow,
he thought. Tomorrow I will send for a lawyer and will
arrange the matter.</p>

<p>But the lawyer was not sent for. Percy had other things
to dream about. In the twilight Hedvig came and sat down
on the edge of his bed. She had been into town for a while,
for the first time for weeks. She looked as solemn as a
priestess. And after a moment’s silence she told him that
she expected a child.</p>

<p>Percy did not say much. He whispered thanks. Then
he kissed her hand and put it on his chest. And then he
lay there trying to imagine that new life that he would
never raise up in his arms. But it was difficult to feel
that it was true. He could scarcely imagine Hedvig as a
mother. He had remorse because he did not feel this more
deeply. He kissed her hand again.</p>

<p>Percy lived one week longer. He had several troublesome
attacks of suffocation after which he was seized by
a death-like weakness. But as soon as he had a clear
moment Hedvig spoke to him of the child. It grew, it
developed, it lived in her consciousness. It was a boy and
he was called Percy. He was a little delicate, but handsome,
with dark hair like his mother’s, blue eyes like his
father’s. Hedvig was no longer so quiet. She spoke
quickly, nervously, in short breathless sentences. It seemed
as if she had tried to put her own fear to sleep. She made
a convulsive and touching effort to keep death away with
the last resources of her womanhood.</p>

<p>And still the whole thing was a lie.</p>

<p>One winter morning when the snow lay thick on the
ground Percy Hill died in his wife’s arms. Something
seemed to make him restless during his last moments. It
was not the child. No, he muttered something over and
over again about the lawyer ... the donation.... It
sounded almost as if he had wanted to force a promise from
Hedvig.</p>

<p>Truly pitiful was this hopeless appeal to her.</p>

<p>Percy Hill died a dilettante. He had succeeded in completing
nothing in all his life. Not even a new will had
he been able to draw up. There was only the one that he
had written the day they were married and in which he
left Hedvig everything.</p>

<p>And there was no child born to him after his death.
Hedvig had cheated him. It was a lie of love. Yes, no
doubt she believed that she lied to console him, to sweeten
his last moments and to make death easier. She was perhaps
quite unconscious of the terrible Selamb logic in the
fact that it was just on the very day that Percy began to be
interested in his donation again that her fiction about an
heir escaped her.</p>

<p>Exhausted by vigils and anxiety Hedvig collapsed after
Percy’s death. For several days she lay unconscious. Not
one of those who arranged for the funeral knew any of
Percy’s old artist friends. So the strange thing happened
that he was driven out to Lidingö cemetery together with
Peter, Stellan and an old gouty sea-captain from Gothenburg,
whom he had never seen in his life.</p>

<p>Hedvig mourned him sincerely. As soon as she could
stand up she hurried out to his grave. For months not a
day passed without her paying it a visit. A rigid figure
in black, she stood there under the snowcovered trees staring
at his grave. Did she ask his pardon for her lie, for not
laying his ashes in an urn in the Hill gallery? Did she
fall back upon memories of their love, sensuous memories?
Did she only try to fill an aching void with the foolish
illusion of physical proximity? I don’t know, but it is a
fact that the tears often came to her eyes. Hedvig cried,
the tearless Hedvig....</p>

<p>Then she returned home to conferences with Levy, who
was making the inventory. Percy had an old-established,
solid fortune. He had only been obliged to sell an insignificant
part of it in order to realize his dreams of a gallery.
There was a cold, numb pleasure in hearing the clever Jew
descant on funds, interest, dividend warrants and investments.
It seemed as if the very soul of gold had spoken
to her with glib tongue and beautiful though ironically
curled lips. After a time she began to understand with a
feeling of secret, refreshing joy how rich she really was.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">IV<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE COLD MOMENT</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">There was a charity fête at the Athletic Ground. The
quadrille on horseback and the bicycle race were over
and now people thronged round the tombola and the
stalls.</p>

<p>Stellan did not look up at the sky when he stepped out
into the saddling yard. He did not give a thought to the
balloon whose gigantic yellow silk bubble was already
beginning to swell out and shimmer in the cool September
sunshine. No, his looks searched anxiously amongst the
scattered groups of spectators outside the ring of guard.
And he suddenly muttered a half-suppressed oath at the
sight of Peter who, furious and massive as a bull, bore
down on him from his ambush. He awaited the attack in
the most deserted spot he could find. And a certain
weariness appeared in the hard lines of his mouth:</p>

<p>“You have become damned difficult to find,” panted
Peter. But Stellan was already prepared with a smile. It
is strange that smiles can thrive so many degrees below
freezing point.</p>

<p>“You can meet me as much as you like when you have
got decent clothes—and a decent face....”</p>

<p>Peter was unshaven. His overcoat dated from the fat
and sentimental period. It now hung on him like a sack.
His barge-like shoes were covered with the dirt of the bad
roads of Selambshof and he had in his hand, not a stick
but a cudgel. And he shook the cudgel and struck the
ground with it:</p>

<p>“You are damned smart, you are! But if I take everything
this fine gentleman possesses perhaps he won’t be
quite so smart. Tomorrow I want my seventy-five thousand,
or else I’ll make you bankrupt!”</p>

<p>Stellan still smiled. He pointed to the balloon and his
tone became exquisitely ironical:</p>

<p>“Come up with me and then we can talk business.”</p>

<p>Peter looked with a ludicrous expression of suspicion
and disapproval on the expensive and dangerous ascent
in which his seventy-five thousand would soar heavenwards:</p>

<p>“If you were at least decently insured,” he sighed. Then
he suddenly grew furious again and shouted, so that he was
overheard by the people round about them:</p>

<p>“I must have the money tomorrow. I won’t wait any
longer.”</p>

<p>Stellan grew pale and came close up to his brother. It
was as if he were abusing some obstinate labourer:</p>

<p>“You lout! You want to get hold of my last share in
Selambshof! But I have already put them up another
spout. Curse you, there are better and bigger creditors
than you! Yes, I have nothing but debts, so my position
is really excellent. The only hope for the creditors is that
the bubble won’t burst. But do you think it will improve
matters for a shabby old moneylender to come and hang
on to my coat tails just as I am going up? No, get away
and keep quiet and I will show you something to make you
think.”</p>

<p>Stellan suddenly had an idea. He pushed aside the
astonished and hesitating Peter without further ceremony
and went straight towards the steps of the tennis pavilion.</p>

<p>There Miss Lähnfeldt was standing amidst a group of
uniforms and allowed Manne von Strelert to pay her his
court. Both had taken part in the quadrille on horseback
and she was dressed in riding breeches, which at that time
was something quite new and bold, and she stood there
amongst all the men, slim and slight, but with her head held
high and with a proud carriage.</p>

<p>Stellan ploughed his way through the group. Not a feature
betrayed what kind of conversation he had just passed
through. The lines round his mouth were gay and slightly
cruel. He saluted, kissed her hand, and said aloud, so
that everybody round them should hear:</p>

<p>“Miss Lähnfeldt, do you remember I promised you a
sensation? Come up with me today.”</p>

<p>Miss Lähnfeldt wanted to appear a sportwoman. She
cultivated to the best of her ability the Anglo-Saxon style.
Thanks to persistent and expensive training she had really
developed her little strength until she was considered a
bold rider and a fairly good tennis player. She did not
answer Stellan at once, but bit her lip and cast a glance at
the officers round her. But Manne protested. One had no
right to tempt charming ladies into the clouds, he thought.
Charming ladies might get dizzy....</p>

<p>Stellan looked gratefully at Manne, certain that his words
would only egg her on. She was not a coward, or at least
she was more vain than she was afraid. And a crowd is a
bellows to vanity. Elvira Lähnfeldt was one of those
women who are excited by a crowd. The thought of some
kind of notoriety always occupied her thoughts. In every
crowd the desire to be noticed, spoken of, praised and envied,
worked like a stinging poison in her veins. When she
now looked at the group around her it was in order to
measure the effect of the proposal! It would surely create
a sensation if she went up, a real sensation....</p>

<p>She did not say “yes” straight out. She answered by the
eternal feminine question:</p>

<p>“But what shall I put on?”</p>

<p>“My military fur coat,” said Stellan. “Besides, your
riding costume is most suitable. But come along, it is
twelve o’clock and the people are waiting.”</p>

<p>She took his arm and they stepped out into the open
space. The group behind them applauded. Manne was
teased at the cavalry being outdistanced by the air force.
There were several people there who were interested in
seeing the two friends’ position improved. The balloon
was already filled. Stellan turned away a poor journalist
who had had half a promise to be allowed to go up with
him, and amidst a murmur of surprise from the crowd he
lifted Miss Lähnfeldt very chivalrously over the edge of the
gondola. But he did not give the order to let go at once.
He did not grudge his partner a few moments of exquisite
joy in the polite and encouraging exclamations of the gentlemen
and the little cries of alarm from her lady friends.</p>

<p>Then the attendants let go the ropes and the balloon rose.
There was a flutter of white handkerchiefs from the dark
group below in the grey oval of the cycle course.</p>

<p>As you know, one need not rise very high before everything
down below looks small.</p>

<p>“What mites,” said Miss Lähnfeldt. And her voice
sounded a little malicious.</p>

<p>Stellan cast a side-glance at her in order to gauge the
effect of the increasing depth beneath them. She looked
down with an expression which seemed to say; “This is
nothing much.”</p>

<p>“Wait a bit, my dear,” thought Stellan. “You will get
as much as you can stand.” He had already made up his
mind that this would not be a pleasure trip, but an adventure.</p>

<p>The wind was west south-west. The balloon had not had
time to rise much before they were out over Lidingön.
Below him Stellan saw the shining green roof of the Hills’
villa.</p>

<p>Hedvig ... yes, he would have to try there too if
everything else went wrong. If only Percy had been alive....
But Hedvig alone, no, there wasn’t much
chance....</p>

<p>The balloon began to sink very suddenly. One must
always be careful when passing over forests, where the air
is warmer and lighter. But Stellan purposely neglected
to cast out any ballast till they almost swept over the tops
of the trees. That was a trick that used to impress beginners.
Stellan looked again at his partner. She was perhaps
a little paler than before and held on a little more tightly
to the edge of the gondola. But if he had hoped for any
frightened screams and looks of anxious appeal he was
doomed to disappointment.</p>

<p>“The balloon must manœuvre badly,” she said.</p>

<p>Stellan flung out ballast, perhaps more than was necessary
and they rose quickly into silent and radiant space
over the bright and dazzling autumn coast landscape. It
was really wonderfully beautiful with the spray of gold
that the leafy trees made amongst the dark pines and the
deep solemn September blue of the water in the bays—which
to the far-penetrating gaze of those above shivered
in iridescence of algæ-green, seaweed-brown and shimmering
gneiss-red nearer inshore in the shallower water. In
a narrow smooth belt of calm water a toy steamer drew
behind it a silver shimmering fan of dwarf-like waves.
And far away in the east along the strangely banked up
horizon the sea stretched like a low endless blue ridge.</p>

<p>But most wonderful of all was the silence and the stillness,
the incomparable, mighty calm in a balloon that
moved with the wind and in which a candle flame would
burn as steadily as in a closed room.</p>

<p>“Strange ... it is like sitting in a glass cupboard,”
said Miss Lähnfeldt in a low voice and there was after all
involuntary admiration in her voice. But then she added:
“Though I must say I thought it would be more exciting....”</p>

<p>Stellan bit his lip: he was not in the mood for enjoying
anything beautiful just now. He felt like a stage manager
who is responsible for effect before a critical and spoilt
public. He thought of Peter, his affairs, marriage—without
any enthusiasm for the last.... He felt almost hostile
to the woman by his side. Her affected indifference
irritated him. He could not manage to pay her any sort
of attention. He felt like a partner who dances out of
time and has nothing to whisper into his partner’s ear.
Annoyed, he tapped the barometer. It sank, though the
balloon was sinking slowly. It was already three o’clock
in the afternoon. The sun suddenly disappeared. Behind
them in the west the sky was clouded. The air began to
grow a cold, whitish grey, and clouded over, they no
longer saw the earth below them. In an incredibly short
time they had become enveloped in a dense cloud.</p>

<p>Stellan did not descend, as was his duty with an
approaching storm when he was so near the sea. He was
a desperado. Miss Lähnfeldt was going to have an experience,
that was all. He threw out several sacks of ballast,
which disappeared in long brown streaks in the fog below
them.</p>

<p>His manœuvring was not quite planless. He had observed
that the wind in the upper strata was several degrees
more southerly and he began to think of the Åland islands.</p>

<p>Now they were suddenly out in the sunshine again, in
the cold dazzling sunlight over an enormous shimmering
sea of cloud. They soared alone in a dazzling white, ever
changing, chaos of snow mountains and lakes of fog—millions
of years before human life existed....</p>

<p>“I have seen this before in Switzerland,” said Miss Lähnfeldt
shivering with cold.</p>

<p>The balloon had risen rapidly and lost much gas. It
soon began to sink again through the cloud world, which
now grew grey. When it cleared up below them they were
already out over a nasty grey, white-crested sea. A very
strong wind was blowing.</p>

<p>Then the first feminine exclamation escaped from Miss
Lähnfeldt:</p>

<p>“But, good heavens, how shall we get back?”</p>

<p>Stellan bowed for the first time with a polite and amiable
smile:</p>

<p>“By steamer,” he said. “We will sleep at Mariehamn
tonight.”</p>

<p>As a matter of fact he was not so sure of it. The wind
higher up had evidently been a few degrees more in the
west than he had counted on. In its present quarter they
would pass south of Åland. But the storm lower down
might draw them south ... otherwise ... well what
otherwise? Well, otherwise they would go to hell....</p>

<p>What does a man like Captain Stellan Selamb feel when
he mutters to himself that he might “go to hell”? Nothing
really. He has never properly conceived death. His egoism
is so hard and polished that the thought of death slips
off everywhere.</p>

<p>If you want an opinion of a man, try to find out his views
of death. Death comes <i>in</i> life and not <i>after</i> life. And it
is what happens in life that makes us really alive. What
else are we but our conception of, our defiance of, our
struggle against, and our victory over, death? Yes, because
there is a real, a living courage which conquers
death....</p>

<p>Stellan had the gambler’s courage. It is always better
than cowardice. But it is really very superficial. A hard
frozen surface with no resilience beneath. Clear but shallow
thoughts that have never penetrated to the depths of
life. An inner reflection of a blind, pitiless Fate....
How much of the courage that meets us in the wild and
bloody history of the world is not of this kind? The great
gamblers! Minds and souls are only cards to them, playing
cards or trumps in the wild gamble of politics and war.
They only know themselves even as trumps in the game.
Even their own terrible egoism is really only a mirage.
For death has not made them alive....</p>

<p>The balloon drove eastwards with the gale. Stellan
sailed low and saved his ballast. In the north they could
see Åland and Lernland and Lumparland. The waves
washed heavily in the apparent stillness around them.
They were sinking lower and lower. The last sack of ballast
went over. The balloon began to shrink round the
valve. There must be a leakage. Now a giant roaring
wave attempted to grab the gondola.</p>

<p>Stellan had to throw out everything loose, the ballast
sacks themselves, ropes, fur coats, stethoscopes and barometer.
He used the momentary respite to assist Miss Lähnfeldt
up into the rigging where she sat as on a trapeze
and held on to the cordage. She was very pale and looked
as if she might faint any moment, so he thought it best
to make her fast.</p>

<p>“This is abominable,” she mumbled, as if she had been
exposed to some clumsiness on the part of a vulgar partner.
But she did not whimper.</p>

<p>They swept in over the breakers and rocks of the wild
and deserted skerries of Kökars. The gondola was already
trailing in the water, and the balloon began to swing and
jerk to and fro. Stellan also climbed up into the rigging.
He took the anchor with him. With violent jerks they
trailed over a stony rocky island on the skerries. Then
again they were carried over an empty roaring bay. But
now the wind had really turned into the south and there
was some wooded country ahead of them. Stellan cut
away the gondola, as it made the balloon dip. Then it
rose for the last time. They sat as in a swing over the
surging water. Phew! now they were rushing in towards
the land. A jetty and a few red-painted outhouses were
visible in the grey twilight. Stellan dropped anchor in
a damp marshy meadow so that the balloon might trail a
little and reduce speed. It caught in an alder with a terrible
jerk. Quick as lightning he tore open one of the
gores—and the balloon partly fell and was partly flung
down into a copse of young birches.</p>

<p>Stellan freed himself at once. He hastened to drag out
his fellow passenger from below the torn, flapping and
billowing balloon cloth. She had fainted....</p>

<p>Some people came running up and he made them carry
her in. They had had the luck to land just beside a country
house. Then he rushed to the telephone and arranged
for telegrams....</p>

<p>Miss Lähnfeldt lay ill for a few days, till Stellan one
day stepped in to her with a bundle of Swedish newspapers
full of highly coloured descriptions of the unique and
adventurous balloon flight of the well-known tennis player
and rider, Miss Lähnfeldt.</p>

<p>For the first time she looked at Stellan with gratitude
and approval.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Stellan was invited to the autumn shoot at Trefvinge.
He gave a low whistle when he saw the name of Miss
Lähnfeldt and not her father on the invitation card. He
understood that the invitation was from her and not from
her father.</p>

<p>But he also whistled, though in another key, when he
heard from the coachman that Captain von Strelert had
already arrived. For it was equally evident that Manne,
Baron Manne von Strelert was the guest of the Count.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Count Lähnfeldt had, as a matter of fact, been extremely
angry over his daughter’s rash action. Busybodies, of
course, telephoned at once to Trefvinge to tell him that
his daughter had gone up in a balloon with Captain Selamb.
In a balloon! It seemed almost indecent to him. He
could not remember any really aristocratic ladies who
had gone up in a balloon. And with that Captain Selamb
into the bargain! From Selambshof ... brother of Peter
Selamb...!</p>

<p>When, later in the day, there came a telephone message
from Furusund that the balloon had been driven out to
sea in the gale, then he regarded the information as a confirmation
of his view that Captain Selamb was not the sort
of gentleman that the daughter of Count Lähnfeldt should
go up in the air with. He was so extremely vexed that
he scarcely felt any anxiety for the life of his only child.</p>

<p>Towards evening he calmed down a little when he
received a wire that they had landed at a quite respectable
Finnish-Swedish country house. And when the following
day he read in the papers of the brave and sporting action
of a lady moving in the highest circles, and of the courage
and the self-control of Miss Lähnfeldt, daughter of
the well-known Count Lähnfeldt of the magnificent seat
at Trefvinge, well, then he thought at last that perhaps
his daughter’s eccentricity had something aristocratic in
it after all.</p>

<p>But from that admission to the approval of Captain
Selamb as in any sort of capacity suitable company for
his daughter was a long step,—So far Stellan had not
yet come, in spite of his well arranged stage management
and press advertisement. It was therefore with measured
dignity and a rather chilly expression that the Lord of
Trefvinge received him. And this occurred in the largest
and most splendid room of the castle, the great tapestry
hall, which might well have subdued even the boldest.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Captain Selamb! My daughter is just
dressing for a ride with Baron von Strelert.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I heard that Manne had promised to come for
a few days,” answered Stellan in a light, almost insolent,
tone. He read the master of the house quite clearly, so
clearly indeed that he sometimes was afraid of not being
able to keep a straight face.</p>

<p>Count Lähnfeldt was a very short man, in spite of the
high heels and extra soles on his shoes. He had an extremely
neat face. His words and his gestures were dignified,
slow, and heraldically stiff. But his eyes showed
a continual nervousness, the nervousness of the actor:
“Do I make an impression—do you believe in me?” they
seemed to say.</p>

<p>Alas, nobody believed at all in him. People made most
impudent fun of him behind his back. He was generally
called Count <i>Loanfeldt</i>, and the reason was known to everybody.</p>

<p>The owner of Trefvinge was the son of an unmarried
actress, but whilst still very young he married the extremely
wealthy widow of a brewer, who died when his only
daughter was born. The title of Count was Portuguese.
He had received it from King Charles, of the house of
Bragança, after having on a certain delicate occasion lent
him a hundred thousand crowns. This happened in Vienna
whilst the monarch was still only Crown Prince. Lähnfeldt,
who had quite early begun to imagine that his unknown
father was a high-born aristocrat, did everything
to correct the unjust fate that had given him a plebeian
name, and when travelling he always used to try to come
into contact with royalty. And now he had managed to
procure rooms at the hotel adjoining the suite of the Crown
Prince, Charles. It struck him at once that the Crown
Prince received a lot of people who did not behave with
becoming reverence at all. When he questioned the porters,
he shrugged his shoulders. The callers were simply creditors.
A gentleman of his Highness’ suite had gambled
away all the funds, and for some incomprehensible reason
no money arrived from home. He could not even pay
his hotel bill.</p>

<p>Herman Bogislaus Lähnfeldt needed no more. He decided
to intervene at once for the salvation of the monarchic
principle. Bowing, he stepped up to the Crown
Prince Charles and begged that an old admirer of the house
of Bragança might be allowed to hand over to its present
august representative an humble gift of a hundred thousand
crowns to be used for some charitable purpose.</p>

<p>The Crown Prince received the cheque with an amazed
but gracious smile.</p>

<p>About half a year later, Lähnfeldt received two large
letters with seals of State and Portuguese stamps. One
contained an account of the use to which his money had
been put in an Orphanage in Lisbon, the other letter contained
the letters patent of his title.</p>

<p>He rushed down to Lisbon and threw himself at the feet
of the newly crowned King Charles. Then he rushed home
again to buy an estate as a background to his new dignity.
And now he sat here at Trefvinge, the ancestral home of
the Oxenstierna family, and tried to fill out the magnificent
frame.</p>

<p>Such was Count Lähnfeldt’s history.</p>

<p>He had one great grief. The title was not hereditary.
Already in Elvira’s childhood he would look at the little
plebeian with compassion and melancholy. And when she
grew up his only hope lay in a suitable marriage for her.</p>

<p>“You must marry, Elvira,” he preached. “If you don’t
marry you will remain plain ‘Miss’ all your life.”</p>

<p>But it had not pleased Miss Elvira to marry yet. She
was already nearing thirty. Some suitors she had turned
away herself, others had withdrawn of their own accord,
to the great astonishment of all but the initiated.</p>

<p>Neither Stellan nor Manne belonged to the initiated.
But both were in such miserable circumstances. And they
knew only too well each other’s business at Trefvinge. All
the same, they kept countenance when they met out in the
sunshine on the steps, at least Stellan did. Manne was
not quite so happy. The poor boy had of course arrived
first at the mill but it hurt him all the same to stand in
the way of an old friend. So he cast timid and remorseful
glances at Stellan when he helped Miss Elvira into the
saddle.</p>

<p>She, on the other hand, seemed in excellent spirits this
morning.</p>

<p>“Come on, Captain Selamb,” she said with a little side-glance
at her father. “Cæsar II is free. We are riding
towards the sand pit.”</p>

<p>Stellan’s voice sounded cold:</p>

<p>“Thank you, but I am too much handicapped.”</p>

<p>She shrugged her shoulders and gave her black mare a
light cut with her whip. But Manne sat still and looked
as if he could not get going. Stellan was cruel enough
to wave a glove, with a meaning wink, to remind his friend
of his faithlessness to “The Glove.”</p>

<p>Never before in his life had Manne looked so lost on
horseback. He suddenly set his bay to a gallop and followed
his companion, who was already disappearing
through the park gates.</p>

<p>Stellan had settled on an entirely different plan of action
to Manne. He had made up his mind to be indifferent
to Miss Lähnfeldt so as to excite her spirit of contradiction,
and to try to win the father instead. For that reason he
at once began to display immense interest in the history
of the castle. Faithfully and indefatigably he accompanied
the Count, as he rattled out a whole armoury of dates,
and roamed around like a parody of greatness in the many
splendid apartments. Patiently he sat for hours in the
library amongst peerages, pedigrees, genealogies, and
Gotha-almanacs and listened to the anecdotes of the lord of
the castle. Count Lähnfeldt knew every anecdote concerning
a prince.... Then they walked outside and down
the steps, and Stellan duly admired the Oxenstierna coat
of arms cut in sandstone over the proud Renaissance doorway.
He sat with a becoming thrill of reverence on the
seat round the giant oak which Axel Oxenstierna had
planted with his own hand and in the shadow of which
the Count, like the previous owners of the castle, used to
sit and marvel at “the small amount of wisdom that the
world is ruled with” and grow horrified at the tendency
of the time to level us all “like pigs’ feet.” Stellan was
surprised at himself that he need not sit silent at the feast
but was also able to say something about Oxenstierna.
The moment before he had not suspected his knowledge.
It had been the same at school long ago when lazy Stellan
always knew an answer after all. Perhaps it was some
kind of thought reading....</p>

<p>The Count by and by worked himself up into stammering
enthusiasm. Oxenstierna! Oxenstierna! It sounded
as if he were speaking of his own ancestor. Well, who
knows if he had not some such thoughts. Then he took
Stellan’s arm and drew him to the small Chapel, of which
he had the patronage, whose white-washed gable shone
under the yellowing birches on the other side of the garden
wall. He took the rather large key of the crypt out of
a case he always carried in his pocket, and staggered in
front of Stellan down into the dusky vault. And over the
richly carved oak and copper coffins he mumbled reverently
a string of names of which most were well known
in history, and stopped at last in front of a gigantic open
coffin of porphyry, the lid of which was leaning against
the wall.</p>

<p>“This,” he said, caressing the carvings on the lid, which
depicted a bear with a little child on its back, “is the
Lähnfeldt coat of arms. And here I shall one day rest
my weary bones.”</p>

<p>You could hear from his tone that death had lost its
bitterness for him since he would enter such distinguished
company.</p>

<p>After all this the Count was a little tired, and, excusing
himself on the plea of important correspondence, he went
up to take his little snooze before dinner, just like any
ordinary human being.</p>

<p>Stellan wandered about alone with his hands behind his
back in the stately park of Trefvinge. Around him this
September day he heard from the high tree tops a sharp
sound, as from an over-tense string. In the clear transparent
air a dry leaf floated slowly down to his feet with
a fine even motion. It was a motion as symmetrical and
regular as the shape of the leaf itself. He pondered for
a moment on the static problem. Then it struck him that
even in his youth he had felt irritated that wealth and
secure luxury should chase shadows and idle fancies in
order to obtain a little excitement. He suddenly shivered
with a light but penetrating dread. He realised here in
the silence of the park in a way that he had never done
before, that he, Stellan Selamb, was on the verge of ruin.
“If I don’t succeed in this,” he thought, “there is no other
way out than the revolver....”</p>

<p>Stellan stood there with twitching face and a queer helpless
movement of his right hand. What was the matter,
were his nerves already giving way? “Well, of course,
one does not lead a life like mine without being punished
for it,” he muttered. “Strange that it comes like this in
the stillness and not in the balloon out there over the sea,
for instance....”</p>

<p>He took a few steps but halted again suddenly amongst
the sunny patches on the hard dry road. The thought
that she, Elvira Lähnfeldt, was now riding by Manne’s
side irritated him like a noxious poison. He saw her suddenly
in the light of anxious and trembling hope. He
saw her as she had sat in the sunshine, light, straight,
elegant on her nervous jet black horse. Her assurance
and her recklessness were thorns in his side. For a moment
he found her really beautiful and desirable in her
cool refinement. The brittle, overstrung elements in her
character seemed to him to be in wonderful harmony with
the beautiful autumn day. Fancy if he might lead a calm
and exquisite life together with this child of luxury and
taste with her the joys of a satisfied ambition! Even the
thought of her secret infirmity seemed to him at this moment
an additional refinement, a promise of a painless, concentrated
life of pleasure.</p>

<p>Stellan pulled himself up as if at a word of command.
“Damn it, I am not falling in love, I hope,” he thought.
But the next moment his thought was: “No, dash it all,
the fact is I have not slept for several nights!” He struck
his leg with his stick: “Keep cool! If you get sentimental,
all is lost. She is nothing but a whimsical and obstinate
child and you must conquer her through her whims and
her obstinacy.”</p>

<p>For a moment Stellan felt his head swim and the ground
give way under his feet. This made him doubly reckless.
Partly from a kind of cruel sensuousness and partly to
give himself courage, he began in imagination to undress
her and lay bare her infirmity. “It is not the softest women
who are the weakest,” he thought. “With all her arrogance
and all her sport she is really a poor, delicate, and
enfeebled creature. She is suffering from the disease of
wealth, the sapping of strength of those who do not need
to do anything for their living. And she can’t have children.
The future is cut out of her body. Whence can she
derive any strong instincts difficult to conquer? No, she
is really a very easy victim to one who is wise and
reckless....”</p>

<p>Stellan already smiled to himself. “No, my dear Manne,
you are too good natured,” he thought. “Even from behind
one can see when you are lying....”</p>

<p>Then he hurried in to dress for dinner.</p>

<p>The evening of that same day, Stellan and Manne were
standing out in the moonlight on the narrow balcony that
ran outside their two rooms on the first floor. The host
and hostess had already withdrawn and everything was
quiet in the big house behind them.</p>

<p>Stellan scrutinized his old friend. Manne’s face was
pale over his big white shirt front. There was really not
much left of the old irrepressible Manne von Strelert.</p>

<p>“The old man isn’t exactly exciting,” Stellan mumbled,
pointing with his thumb towards the house. Manne answered
with unusual vehemence:</p>

<p>“Why can’t he realize that he is behind the times with
his aristocracy! That sort of thing originated in the middle
ages, damn it all! And how he chews my poor ‘Baron.’
Heavens above, it makes me wish I were a grocer.”</p>

<p>Stellan was amazed that Manne should get excited so
easily. He felt a strange cold satisfaction and continued
pitilessly:</p>

<p>“My dear Manne, you have not much respect for your
prospective father-in-law.”</p>

<p>Manne started as if he had been struck. He was unguarded
and had no repartee ready. He put his hand
on Stellan’s arm and mumbled almost tenderly:</p>

<p>“Stellan ... don’t let us talk about that any more....”</p>

<p>For a moment they stood silent, looking out into the
blue shimmering night which was full of small fluttering
creatures. Below them the apple trees in the orchard
were bowed down with fruit. Further away a thin veil
of mist lay over a meadow in which were some grazing
cows whose white spots shone like newly washed clothes
in the moonlight. And beyond the bright edging of yellow
reeds the bay of Lake Mälar lay dreaming with a narrow
silver streak upon it that leapt into life when a breeze
passed. Still further there were reflections of the moon
constantly appearing and disappearing where the water
seemed to repose as calm as a mirror but was all the same
stirred by a faint ground swell.</p>

<p>The whole atmosphere seemed full of the delicious coolness
of rich ripe fruits, and full of the peace and calm of
possession and ownership.</p>

<p>“Fancy that there are people who lead quiet and happy
lives,” mumbled Manne.</p>

<p>Stellan imitated his tone:</p>

<p>“Yes, why are we not innocent vegetarians, feeding on
carrots and staring at the moon.... Nonsense! Manne!
Nonsense! There are people who lead dull lives, and
people who don’t. Let us as long as possible belong to
the latter! Now is the hour of lovers and gamblers.”</p>

<p>He suddenly made a gesture embracing the castles and
the acres of Trefvinge.</p>

<p>“Look here, Manne, all this that seems so safe and still—shall
we cut through the pack for it tonight?”</p>

<p>When these words escaped Stellan he had still no second
thought. It looked as if Manne did not at first understand
what he meant. He remained silent for a long time,
but then he mumbled too:</p>

<p>“Yes. Let’s cut for it.”</p>

<p>There was a strange dull note of relief in his voice.
It was as if his friend had relieved him of the burden of
willing and choosing for himself.</p>

<p>Thoughts flashed quick as lightning through Stellan’s
brain. It was now that he began to feel a strange assurance
that he would somehow win. His words came quick,
like rapier thrusts:</p>

<p>“I have an unopened pack of cards with me. We will
simply back our luck. He who draws the highest heart
stays. The other leaves early tomorrow morning on the
clear understanding that he does not intend to come back.”</p>

<p>Manne was paler than ever and had a vacant look in
his eyes:</p>

<p>“Right you are!”</p>

<p>Stellan ran inside to his room and searched for the
cards. The lamp was not lit. He had to search for a
long time in his suit case. Meanwhile he was thinking
swift as lightning. “Manne must not draw the highest
heart,” he thought, “No, not this time. For then all is
over with me....” The shiver and the dizziness he had
felt in the park returned. “No, Manne must not draw
the highest card....” At last he found the pack of
cards, picked it up with trembling hands and pressed his
thumb nail hard into the edge of the ace of hearts as it
peeped out through the round hole in the wrapper. There
must be quite a noticeable mark on the other side ...
Stellan had not premeditated this, had never before done
anything of the kind. He felt something approaching
surprise.</p>

<p>“Well, that is what we Selambs do,” he muttered to
himself. Quickly he went back to Manne’s room and
flung the pack on the table:</p>

<p>“You open the pack and shuffle!”</p>

<p>Manne took up the pack and shuffled slowly, almost
indifferently. Stellan sat down opposite him.</p>

<p>“We must avoid misunderstandings,” he said. “The
two is lowest and the ace highest, isn’t that so?”</p>

<p>“Good!”</p>

<p>With a gesture indicative of long practice Manne spread
the cards out fan-like on the polished surface of the mahogany
table:</p>

<p>“You draw first, as I shuffled.”</p>

<p>Stellan’s eyes looked searchingly at the fan for the
marked card. No, he could not see it. He must gain
time. He opened his cigarette case:</p>

<p>“Let us smoke a cigarette together, before we draw.
It will be the most exquisite cigarette we ever smoked
together. A cigarette with Fate....”</p>

<p>“All right!”</p>

<p>The cigarettes were finished. Stellan had to draw.
Now he saw the ace on the extreme right. The little mark
on the back of the card was noticeable in a tiny reflection
from the lamp. Stellan had a feeling of being lifted off
the floor, of soaring. But he did not dare to draw the
ace at once. That would have looked too strange. He
had to minimize the risk.</p>

<p>“Look here, Manne,” he said, smilingly. “Supposing I
draw a low heart straight off and you draw a club. Then
it would be sudden death. That would be idiotic extravagance
with our precious excitement. We will continue
to draw till each of us has at least one heart and after
that the highest wins.”</p>

<p>“All right,” said Manne. His tone had become more
and more obviously indifferent.</p>

<p>Stellan drew the nine of clubs. He saw Manne’s hand
hovering over the cards with cold excitement. But it
stopped at the harmless end and drew the ace of spades.</p>

<p>Next draw. Not even now could Stellan make up his
mind to take the ace of hearts. He drew a card beside
it, thinking that Manne, in obedience to some psychological
law, would try his luck at the other end. He drew the
two of clubs.</p>

<p>Manne drew the knave of hearts. A cry escaped him.
It sounded as if he had hurt himself.</p>

<p>Stellan had not drawn a heart yet. Now he had to
take it. He felt strangely frightened. It seemed as if
he were about to put his hand into somebody else’s purse.
He felt as if all his fellow officers were sitting round him
staring at his fingers. “No, damn it, what am I really
doing,” he thought. Then he pulled himself together.
“Bah—you must throw out ballast—keep afloat. And nobody
knows!”</p>

<p>He turned up the ace.</p>

<p>Manne leaned back in his chair with a little tired smile,
a smile of sad, weary, pathetic relief.</p>

<p>“Congratulations,” he muttered, “congratulations. Fate
was right that time, perfectly right.”</p>

<p>They smoked for a moment in silence. Stellan wanted
to say something encouraging but could not get the words
over his lips. It was Manne who took up the thread again:</p>

<p>“I say, Stellan, don’t you sometimes shudder at life
... and yourself?”</p>

<p>“When some excitement is over, I sometimes feel discomfort....”</p>

<p>Manne’s voice sounded childishly pleading:</p>

<p>“Yes, but Stellan, have you never experienced moments
when you really shudder at yourself ... at all the miserable
and damnable things one has done?”</p>

<p>“No, I have never permitted myself that luxury.”</p>

<p>Marine looked at him with a mien in which for the first
time there was something of a stranger.</p>

<p>“You are a bit of a barbarian after all, my dear Stellan,”
he mumbled, “You have a queer insensibility on which
to fall back. I am damned if I know how it is but I
have never been able to <i>will</i> anything when I have been
with you. But I will tell you this much, I should never
have entered into this folly if I had not made up my mind
beforehand to escape from it all. It’s disquieting to play
for a living human being.... No, away with it all....”</p>

<p>“My dear Manne, I can’t help it if you only drew a
knave of hearts,” mumbled Stellan coldly.</p>

<p>“No, old boy, of course you can’t, but that’s not the
point. I have felt the whole time that this was impossible.
You don’t understand what a human being can feel like,
Stellan. I played only because you proposed it. For
twenty years I have not done anything else but what you
proposed. I am a wretch. And you, Stellan, what are
you? Imagine! I have known you for so long and yet
I don’t even know that. It’s strange, but tonight ... I
almost seem to catch a glimpse of you, after all. Yes,
you are one of those who succeed in everything. You
remain a Selamb. And all the same I am somehow sorry
for you, Stellan. Yes, I feel damned sorry for you, because,
you see, there is something in life that you would
never understand if you lived to be a hundred....”</p>

<p>Manne had never been known to make so long a speech
before. Stellan stood up and patted him on the shoulders.</p>

<p>“My dear Manne, now you are ready for a rest,” he said.</p>

<p>“That’s right ... ready for a rest,” muttered Manne,
and gave Stellan a hand which at first was limp, but afterwards
pressed hard the hand of his friend.</p>

<p>Thus they separated.</p>

<p>If Manne had realized, about ten years earlier, all he
realized that night, his life would perhaps have been
shaped differently.</p>

<p>Stellan did not go to bed immediately. The genial mists
of sleep seemed to have flown into the infinite distance. He
stood in the moonlight leaning against the stone parapet
of the balcony and felt how its chill mounted from his
hands to his chest. His thoughts multiplied mechanically
and spread like hoar frost. He thought of his own life.
“I have been an incurable gambler,” he thought. “Well,
what of it—it requires courage after all, that flirtation with
Fate. You can say what you like but I have been a dare-devil.
Chance has been my God and I have not betrayed
him....”</p>

<p>Cold and penetrating a voice returned the answer he
had expected all the time: “Not until tonight. You marked
the cards. You were frightened, Stellan Selamb, frightened....”</p>

<p>Stellan was not, for the moment, thinking of Manne,
whom he had seduced into gambling, from whom he had
won, and whom he now knew to be destitute. No, he
only heard the voice that had called him afraid: So cold
and selfish can conscience be.</p>

<p>“No, I was not at all frightened,” he protested. “The
fact is that I at last perceived my own stupidity. What
the devil is the use of relying on chance. Chance is the
fool of necessity, nothing else. And we have been the
fools of the fool. If everything is a mathematical certainty
what the deuce does it matter if I dig my nail into
an ace of hearts!”</p>

<p>But it is dangerous to betray one’s God even if he is a
fool. The pitiless voice was not silenced: “You stole
your friend’s last chance, Stellan Selamb, you are no
longer a gambler, you are a thief, a cowardly thief.”</p>

<p>Stellan shuddered. That is the worst that can happen
to a man of his stamp—to doubt his own courage. He
discovers all at once all the things he has neglected to be
afraid of. The stone parapet felt dreadfully cold. It
positively made his hands stiff. But he could not let go.
The moon seemed to breathe a silent, cold threat. What
lies were told about the moon? A dead world! The death’s
head from space grinned into his face. Stellan suddenly
looked round with an uncertain look. Behind him rose
the high white façade like a wall of snow. It struck a
chill into his back. And behind it slept the woman without
a future, the woman whose bosom was a tomb. Was
it not almost suicide to take such a half dead creature to
wife?</p>

<p>“Why do I stand here in the moonlight,” he thought.
“Am I alive or am I only a ghost?”</p>

<p>Yes, the moment of agony had come to Stellan Selamb
as it comes to everybody. He felt a cruel fear. But it
was not the fear that is the beginning of wisdom. He had
gracefully skated on the outside edge on the smooth ice
of prejudices and fictions. But now he had fallen through
into deep reality. “Ugh—this seems to be bottomless!
Yes, the world is as deep as my fears.”</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Stellan came down late the following morning and found
Count Lähnfeldt in an evident bad temper at Captain von
Strelert’s sudden and unceremonious departure.</p>

<p>But out on the parapet of the steps Elvira sat already
impatiently waiting for her ride. She laughed and
shrugged her shoulders:</p>

<p>“The Baron has already run away,” she said. “It was
not an orderly retreat, it was precipitate flight.”</p>

<p>The morning sun and the ride helped Stellan to recover
himself. After the ghostly visions of the night he
enjoyed feeling Cæsar’s fine shoulders working beneath
him. The coolness of the rushing air around his forehead
and temples mingled exquisitely with the gentle innocent
warmth of the beautiful, gleaming body of the
horse. Stellan did not feel exactly tired, only strangely
unsubstantial and fragile.</p>

<p>They were riding in silence and he kept a little behind.
He could not understand his feelings yesterday in the
park. No, today he looked at her more critically than
ever. Even during the ride when she appeared to greater
advantage than otherwise he found in her something attenuated,
tense, unsexed, that left his instincts cold and
unmoved. But that did not worry him now. It was rather
a relief. It somehow made the thing easier. For one
always feels it is easier to reach a goal that one does not
long for too intensely. And it was high time. Tomorrow
the rest of the shooting party was due to arrive, and
then it might be difficult to find an opportunity.</p>

<p>Stellan tried to imagine how his rejected predecessors
had behaved under similar circumstances. Of course they
had stopped her in a narrow concealed forest path where
the horses had been forced close together and were caressing
each other’s noses in the twilight of the pines. And
then they had avowed their intentions in the traditional
style and received a shrug of the shoulders for an answer.</p>

<p>Stellan made up his mind that she should hear something
different.</p>

<p>He chose a moment when they were stopped by a
floating bridge which was open to let pass a sand barge
that was just being slowly towed through. His tone was
as cold as possible:</p>

<p>“Miss Lähnfeldt, what would you say to a shoot in
Africa?”</p>

<p>She really looked surprised.</p>

<p>“A shoot in Africa?”</p>

<p>“Yes, up the Nile, for instance. To shoot hippopotamuses,
crocodiles, lions. You get a licence in Cairo and
hire a boat, a comfortable house-boat, and a few niggers.”</p>

<p>“Well ... yes ... perhaps it would be an idea ...
since we can’t go to the moon....”</p>

<p>“And how do you think I would be as manager and
courier then?”</p>

<p>“Well ... perhaps....”</p>

<p>“Would you like to try it with me?”</p>

<p>“I am afraid it would be a bit difficult to arrange.”</p>

<p>“Not if we got married....”</p>

<p>She suddenly looked straight at him, defiantly, nervously.
Her voice was hard, almost shrill.</p>

<p>“I am ... an invalid....”</p>

<p>“And I am ruined....”</p>

<p>A moment before Stellan had never meant to say anything
of the kind; he only had a clear feeling that he
must be absolutely unsentimental. But he did not regret
it. A brutal sincerity may sometimes be the most refined
of lies.</p>

<p>The barge had at last passed through and sailed on.
Stellan continued in a different and more passionate tone:</p>

<p>“I don’t seek any repetition of my life’s former adventures.
What is most exquisite in you, Elvira, is that
you are ... free. Heaven protect me from those women
who only breathe the nursery. No, there is a different and
more robust air about you, an air in which one can breathe.
I have never dreamt of such courage in a woman as you
showed up in the rigging of the balloon. I sincerely believe
that we together might do something bold and great
with our lives.”</p>

<p>“To begin with, we should make father furious,” she
said in a voice that did not sound at all distressed at the
prospect. Then she suddenly turned her horse and started
off homewards at a sharp gallop.</p>

<p>Stellan followed silent and pale, with lips pressed
tight together, without knowing what to think. It was
exactly the same feeling as he had in the presence of the
roulette ball. Through his head a ridiculous thought
flashed. “Be bold and take your courage in both hands.
I never talked about courage till I began to doubt it. And
now just because I am afraid I shall fling down my
courage as if it were the ace of trumps in the highest
suit. It will be a continuation of yesterday’s little cheating
game.”</p>

<p>And he felt how chill self-contempt was beginning to
grow up out of the events of the night....</p>

<p>Not until they had arrived at the broad steps did the
whirling ball stop. Then the princess of the palace reined
in her horse and graciously stretched out her hand with a
quick nervous smile:</p>

<p>“Well, all right then....”</p>

<p>Stellan did not kiss her riding glove. In front of the
groom he bent quickly forward and pressed his lips to
her cheek.</p>

<p>She kept her countenance.</p>

<p>“Well, one can still live, even with a little self-contempt,”
he thought, when of her own accord she put her arm
through his on the steps. He was right. Nothing really
improves your chances better in the game of life.</p>

<p>Elvira was right in saying her father would be furious.
The little man positively swelled with wounded dignity,
when Stellan came to ask for his daughter’s hand. Elvira
hastened to point out that she was of age and could do
as she liked, but then he threatened to cast her off, to disinherit
her. Yes, he would give all he possessed to the
House of Nobles. She tore his heart to pieces when she
reminded him in a dry tone that all he possessed came from
her mother and that she had her own inheritance from her
mother. To be the head of the noble family of Lähnfeldt,
and to hear such words from a degenerate plebeian
daughter was truly terrible. He summoned to his assistance
all the great departed of the castle to fight his fight
against his blind and irreverent daughter. He painted in
wonderful colours the brilliant and distinguished future
she was thoughtlessly flinging away. He threatened to
descend on her wedding day into the big porphyry coffin
in the crypt below the Church.</p>

<p>Goodness only knows if Elvira would have had the
strength to struggle on, had not the old man’s mad and
obstinate resistance suddenly received a blow. A few
weeks later a scandal occurred in society that put the
Count’s superstitious belief in the aristocrat to a severe
test.</p>

<p>His own choice, Baron Manne von Strelert, Captain of
the Horse Guards, had shot himself after having forged
Count Lähnfeldt’s signature on a bill for twenty thousand
crowns. Then the lord of Trefvinge at last gave in, sighing.
Poor Manne had served Stellan even unto death....</p>

<p>Where Manne had hidden those lost twenty thousand
crowns was never quite cleared up. But amongst his fellow
officers there was some talk about “The Glove,” having
taken fine new business premises immediately after his
death and having considerably increased her business.</p>

<p>Stellan was married at the end of November. There
was a splendid ceremony in Church with many decorations
and uniforms. Peter was promised higher interest on his
loans on the condition that he was ill and absent from the
celebrations.</p>

<p>The general opinion was that the bridegroom looked a
little stiff and aged.</p>

<p>The pair set out immediately for Africa for their shoot.</p>

<p>While the rice pattered against the window of the reserved
carriage decorated with flowers, people outside on the platform
whispered to each other that there was not much risk
in this couple penetrating into Africa, as everybody knew
that nothing could happen to the bride.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">V<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">WASTE</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">The Selamb stratagem had succeeded with Tord and
his wife. A couple of years had passed without anything
being heard from them. Stellan could celebrate
his wedding without the slightest admixture of bohemianism.
And Tord had not again exercised his temperament
in the press. Everything was quiet and the pair had
evidently settled for good out there by the sea.</p>

<p>But then a communication arrived at Selambshof, signed
Tord of Järnö, in which Peter was enjoined in angry and
haughty tones immediately to procure more money.</p>

<p>In less than three years the money had wasted away.
Let us see how this had happened.</p>

<p>First of all they had of course built beyond their means
in the wildest manner. When Tord and Dagmar one still
and radiant April day paid their first visit to Järnö, they,
of course, proudly ignored the insipid, idyllic southern
glen with its little red tenant’s cottage and rushed up
amongst the sparse stunted pines on the hill above. On
the highest, most exposed point, where there was a view
over both the bay and the sea, they stopped:</p>

<p>“This is where the house shall stand!”</p>

<p>And it must be built of thick, round logs with a covered
verandah, and a dragon’s head and open fireplace. An
eagle’s eyrie on the cliff it was to be. Tord made the
drawings himself. But not a tree must be felled on Järnö,
so all the timber must be brought in. Labour might probably
have been found on the islands round about if they
had not been in such a hurry. But they had to get workmen
from town. And terribly troublesome and expensive
it was to trail the heavy logs from the pier up the steep hill,
where there was not even a path.</p>

<p>Anyhow, towards the middle of the summer the grating
of the saws and the blows of the hammers were heard.</p>

<p>Meanwhile Tord and Dagmar lived a glorious tent life
on a meadow by the sea. They sailed in their new-built
boat, swam, took sunbaths and ran about naked like savages
on the rocks to the great amusement of the workmen up on
top.</p>

<p>One day Tord covered Dagmar all over with fine clay
taken from the bottom of the bay and she stood there in
shining blue on the shell-covered sand, like a statue.
Mattson the bailiff came walking down between the juniper
bushes with an unfinished oar on his shoulders. She, however,
stood still and laughed aloud:</p>

<p>“Selamb has made a statue of me! Don’t you think I’m
a funny statue, Mattson?”</p>

<p>Mattson blinked his eyes and walked on, shaking his grey
head at such shamelessness. He wondered in his own mind
what sort of gentlefolk had come out to Järnö.</p>

<p>After dinner they went up towards the hill to see if their
house was growing. Tord always had a bottle under his
arm, and when work was finished the men were treated all
round to a drink. Neither he nor Dagmar despised the
glass. These little festivities were not exactly ceremonious,
for the men soon discovered that they had no need to choose
their words. Dagmar laughed and Tord imitated their
phrases as soon as the drink began to affect him. It was
wonderfully easy to learn their language. “I am studying
the people,” he thought, “I look straight through their
simple minds. I will make something out of it some day,
something uncommonly fresh and piquant....”</p>

<p>But then it grew suddenly silent as the weary workmen
staggered down to sleep in the bailiff’s barn. And with
the silence it seemed as if space had suddenly become a
deep vortex. And the evening was cruelly cold and green
over the serrated edges of the black forests in the west.
Then it was a comfort to have spirit in your body. Tord
threw back his head, a little too much back, he almost
toppled over. “I am a poet,” he thought. “It is I, Tord
Selamb, who am pleased to interpret the mysterious meaning
of the dull song of the ground swell. The sea, the
clouds, the cliffs are mine, and I do with them as I like.
Wait till I give myself up to it. Then I shall produce a
hymn, something powerful, rude, infernal, something of
nature’s elemental beauty....”</p>

<p>And he felt a supreme contempt for the miserable slaves
in town.</p>

<p>Then he went to sleep in Dagmar’s arms, which were
brown and cool and soft.</p>

<p>Towards autumn the eyrie in the cliffs was ready. It
was visible from afar and became at once an excellent
and recognized landmark for sailors both out at sea and
in the bay. There was a large, high hall and a couple of
small rooms with folding beds. Tord furnished them with
reindeer skins, elk horns, Lapplanders’ knives, guns, axes
and ice hooks. And over the door a bear’s skull glinted
ghostlike in the twilight.</p>

<p>They had made a secret arrangement with the old gardener
at Selambshof, the philosopher in the neglected garden,
and he used to come out as their only servant. He
had been a sailor before he started growing cabbages and
he felt a longing for the sea. His work was to carry water,
make log fires, and open tins of preserves.</p>

<p>Meanwhile the Mattsons down in the dell lived their quiet
workaday life, tied to the soil, the water, and the seasons of
the year. They banked up their potatoes, cut their hay and
their rye, milked their two cows, and plied their nets and
lines, all with silent, disapproving side-glances at the queer
folk on the hill.</p>

<p>As long as there was summer and sunshine and the air
vibrated with the hammer blows on his cliff fortress, Tord
was contemptuous of the silent disapproval that crawled
about on its ridiculous daily round somewhere below his
feet. But now it was autumn, silent, still, darkening
autumn, far away from the noise and the lights of the town.
And Tord began by and by to realize that the Mattsons
were in their neighbourhood.</p>

<p>One evening he took a bottle in his pocket and climbed
down into the valley: “I will feel that devil’s pulse,” he
thought.</p>

<p>Mattson sat in his workshop carving:</p>

<p>“Well, Mattson, shall we have a drink to clear our
heads?”</p>

<p>“Thank you, sir, but I don’t care about anything strong
in the middle of the week like this.”</p>

<p>“All right, I’ll drink it myself then. What are you slaving
away at?”</p>

<p>The old man thoughtfully turned a piece of lilac wood
in his hand before he began to work with his knife:</p>

<p>“I am making pins for a rake.”</p>

<p>“Now, for the winter?”</p>

<p>“Summer will come again. And it’s not good for poor
people to be idle....”</p>

<p>That was one for Tord. He struck at the nettles outside
the door with his stick. The calm in Mattson’s eyes irritated
him. Both sea and sky became commonplace beside
that miserable plodding. What was the use of the autumn
coming and the leaves falling and the darkness and loneliness
when Mattson sat carving rake pins all the same?</p>

<p>“I will pay you back for that, old fellow,” thought Tord.
And he longed for an autumn storm, a real three-day
autumn gale. Especially when he had his nets out.</p>

<p>Then came the autumn ploughing. Nobody possessed
beasts of burden out here by the sea, but Mattson’s neighbours
came sailing in with their wives. And then they
yoked themselves to the plough. Mattson’s wife also took
part and pulled, though she was so old, but Mattson drove.
Furrow after furrow they ploughed in the drizzling rain
with tough sustained persistence.</p>

<p>Tord ran into the forest to escape seeing it. But he
found no peace, he had to go back to the ploughing. For
a moment he stood behind a juniper bush and stamped
with anger, then he suddenly rushed out into the clay:</p>

<p>“Stop!” he cried. “This is my soil and I won’t look
on at this miserable business.”</p>

<p>They stopped and stared at him:</p>

<p>“What is one to do when the island will not feed a
beast?” suggested Mattson.</p>

<p>Tord stalked about with heavy lumps of clay under his
shoes:</p>

<p>“How much can you get out of these miserable patches?”</p>

<p>“Oh, about three bushels of rye,” mumbled the bailiff,
and wiped the perspiration from his forehead with the back
of his hand. “The soil is good.”</p>

<p>“All right, I’ll pay you for three bushels! But get away
now!”</p>

<p>And Tord took out some bank-notes.</p>

<p>But Mattson looked at his neighbour and shook his
head:</p>

<p>“No, sir, you mustn’t make fun of an old man. I have
ploughed this soil for forty years, I have. You put your
money back again.”</p>

<p>Upon which Mattson made a sign to the drawers, who put
their backs into the work again and continued their furrow
as if nothing had happened.</p>

<p>From that day on Tord hated all that was Mattson’s.
Incessantly he was running up against the object of his
annoyance. Mattson’s cock woke him in the mornings
with his obstinate moralisings on the dung heap. When
he went down to his boat he swore because he had to dive
under the old man’s nets, and on the juniper slope he was
irritated by the stupid bleating of the sheep. In the midst
of his land he was again reminded of Mattson by a lot of
troublesome fences, cleverly built up of stones, branches
and thorns. Such things irritate a free man strolling about
on his own property. Tord did not step over them, no, he
put his foot on the rubbish and enjoyed hearing it crash
down, and he stepped through as proudly as if he were
stepping over the walls of Jericho. But the next time he
came strolling along he found to his fury that the fence
had been repaired as if by magic.</p>

<p>It was work, patience, foresight, civilization that Tord
hated in Mattson. This hatred occupied him fully the whole
of the autumn. If he sat down to write and could not get
into the right mood it was Mattson’s fault. If he got drunk
it was as a protest against the sobriety of that damned old
blockhead. When at last the gale came, Tord had his great
day. A real raging south-easterly gale so that the old man
could not get out and save his catch but had to go about
waiting anxiously to haul in his torn nets full of seaweed
and rubbish.</p>

<p>One day Tord flew into a real rage. One of his dogs,
a big ferocious mastiff, had caught his leg in a fox trap
which the bailiff persisted in putting out in spite of Tord’s
prohibition. There was a terrible scene and Tord would
probably have struck the old man in his own kitchen if
Dagmar had not come between them. But from that
moment Tord swore inwardly that Mattson should leave
Järnö. He only waited for quarter day, which was the first
of December, to give him notice.</p>

<p>You can imagine his malicious joy when the whole first
week of December had passed without Mattson bringing the
rent.</p>

<p>The old man only stared when at last he came with his
poor notes and was told that he was to leave at once.</p>

<p>“I have lived here forty years,” he mumbled calmly,
“And I have always been accustomed to pay some time in
December after I have been into town and sold my salted
herrings and mutton.”</p>

<p>He could not realize anything so catastrophic as that he
should leave Järnö.</p>

<p>Tord stood there grey in the face shaking the lease in his
hand. “Now I suppose I shall see something else than
that damned calm in your eyes,” he thought.</p>

<p>“You have not paid in due time, and now you have got
to clear out. Järnö is mine, you see, and I don’t want you
here any longer.”</p>

<p>Mattson only shook his head. He went home with a very
thoughtful expression, and the same day he hauled up the
sail of his big boat to go into town to speak to the storekeeper
and to people versed in law, in order to find out the
rights of the matter. But his wife came up to Dagmar
crying. And Dagmar begged for her and scolded Tord
and said that he was disgusting, but it was no use. And
then she cried too, because she was afraid of the loneliness,
when she would be the only woman on the island. But
Tord rushed out and stalked about alone the whole of the
cold winter day with his lame dog and would not be mollified.</p>

<p>Mattson returned from his journey with a gloomy face,
and offered to compromise by a payment of damages. Yes,
he would even try to pay a higher rent. But Tord only
shouted that he wanted to be left in peace.</p>

<p>The following day Mattson came again, and this time he
was humble and alarmed, and begged as if for his life.
And now it was a joy for Tord to look into his eyes. Yes,
he had a great and lovely revenge on all the prudence and
calmness of the world. He escaped with a cruel feeling
of pleasure from the idler’s secret feeling of inferiority.</p>

<p>“No!” he cut him short. “I won’t move. You’ll find
here, Mattson, no use for your rake pins. Clear out now!”</p>

<p>Shortly before Christmas a couple of sand barges arrived
at the pier, and took on board Mattson’s corn, cattle, furniture
and tools. It cut one’s heart to see the kitchen table,
the folding bed, the plants, moved out into the winter cold.
Tord stood up on his hill-top and watched. He meant to
be defiant and hardhearted and enjoy the ice-cold wind.
But as a matter of fact he was frightened and felt sick.</p>

<p>Then four steady and determined men from the barges
came up and demanded on Mattson’s account a round sum
for the autumn sowing, manure, newly planted fruit trees,
and improvements to piers, fences, outhouses. Tord paid
without bargaining and with a certain tremulous eagerness.</p>

<p>Mattson did not show himself except on a receipt.</p>

<p>Then one of the barges set off with the old couple on
board. The other remained a little behind. There, hidden
among the alders by the shore, stood a powerful youth and
peered up towards the hill. When he saw Tord set out for
a walk, he followed him unperceived. He chose a quiet,
suitable place where there were no witnesses. There he
suddenly sprang out and gave Tord a blow on the back of
his head, so that he fell unconscious for a time and awoke
covered with blood and with two teeth missing. The barge
had already disappeared, swallowed up by the grey ice-cold
winter twilight across the bay.</p>

<p>That was the first time Tord had suffered rough, bodily
ill-treatment. It brought out again all the timid hatred of
mankind that his marriage had seemed for a moment to
thrust aside.</p>

<p>He came home late and said he had fallen and struck
against a tree stump. Dagmar could not help laughing for
a moment at the ridiculous gap in his teeth. But she
stopped short when she saw his expression, and her laugh
turned to sobs. She had evil presentiments, Dagmar, and
they were to come true....</p>

<p>Tord had not so many opportunities of kicking down
Mattson’s fences and revelling in his new eaglelike loneliness.
It soon appeared that he must go and buy provisions
if they were not to starve to death when the ice came
and it was too thick to get through with a boat, and not
thick enough to walk on. They had, as a matter of fact,
cut away the ground beneath their feet by turning Mattson
out. Where were they now to procure milk, fish, meat and
wood? Tord sailed about to the neighbouring islands and
told the peasants to bring him these necessities, but they
were annoyed at his treatment of Mattson and therefore
could not spare him even a herring.</p>

<p>Tord was to learn to his annoyance that Mattson with his
foresight and experience had stood like a rock between
him and a thousand worries and difficulties. But this only
strengthened him in his angry resolve to help himself. In
a furious north wind he and the old gardener sailed twelve
miles to the nearest store and there he bought a boatload
of preserved food, ham, potatoes, flour and lamp oil. They
had to hack their way out of the harbour through ice half
an inch thick, frozen during the night, so it was high
time....</p>

<p>Then came the real winter and locked them in with dark
and unsafe ice.</p>

<p>At the end of February the old gardener fell on the very
slippery ground when he was carrying water from the well,
and broke his leg above the knee. Fortunately the ice bore
just then, so they were able to get him into hospital. They
could not tempt another servant out to the eagle’s nest, so
now they had to shift for themselves. Tord was not able
to climb the hill with water and wood, so they had to move
into Mattson’s humble cottage for the winter. In the spring
Tord had soundings made but they found no water up on
the hill: so he had to bring out more workmen to construct
a proper road up. All this cost money—so much that even
Tord realized he could not go on for ever. Then he bought
fishing and shooting implements and a few goats in order
to help him out, and he took to cattle breeding. But now for
the first time he really missed Mattson’s experience....
He did not know where to try for the cod. He did not know
how to deal with a tangled net. The ducks flew past when
he lay out in the skerries. And the goats soon dried up;
and besides, they became so wild that he could not catch
them. So during the course of the summer these means of
support failed him, and he had to turn to expensive
preserved food again.</p>

<p>Dagmar had not much time to run about naked in the
sunshine this summer. There was not so much left that
was “beautiful and wonderful and lovely.” But she had
not quite lost her gypsy-like boisterousness and freedom
from care, though when there was no alcohol left and the
bad weather really set in, it might happen that she grew
sulky and quarrelsome. Once towards the autumn when
she had had special cause for anxiety she mentioned town,
but Tord flew into such a rage that she was frightened and
flew out into the kitchen with her cards and her pipe. And
Tord strolled about the shores for weeks cogitating in dull
anger on the shameless weakness and faithlessness of
women.</p>

<p>The whole of this winter Tord went about plaguing himself
with his money worries, so that he had no energy left
for anything else. The great book that he was to write,
his masterpiece, his hymn to nature, weighed him down
like a dead weight. It was like loose ballast which only
increased the lurch, when he inclined to melancholy.
Nature swayed around him like a helpless chaos. He had
moments of hatred of the frequent gales that would never
yield a song. He grew furious with the eternal, rolling,
breaking seas whose rhythm he could not catch.</p>

<p>“Money,” he thought, “that cursed money. I am never
free!”</p>

<p>Towards the spring he at last wrote the letter to Peter.
It had cost him weeks of effort and disgust, such a terror
had he of everything in the nature of business. His
haughty insolence was only an armour to shield him
against his lack of confidence, his fear, and his suspicions.</p>

<p>Peter had not expected such news so soon. He rubbed
his hands. And he took good care not to show the letter to
his brother and sisters. This time he meant to settle the
business alone. Peter delayed his reply for a whole fortnight
in order to humble Tord. Then he came sailing out
himself to Järnö, not in his own cutter, but in a humble
little fisherman’s boat. It was in the twilight of an April
day. Nobody seemed to have noticed him up in the big,
grey, log house. The island looked completely deserted.
Peter took the opportunity of looking round a little.
Neglect and waste struck him like a cold blast. Broken
down fences, unploughed fields, empty cattle sheds, plundered
outhouses with half open doors hanging on a single
hinge. Not a cow or a pig or a hen. He scratched his
chin thoughtfully, but his expression was not of discontent,
on the contrary! “I see, that’s how things are,” he thought,
“I shall escape cheaper than I had thought. Why give a
lot of money to people who can’t look after anything?”
And he mentally lowered his bid for the remainder of Tord’s
shares in Selambshof by several tens of thousand crowns.</p>

<p>That neglect cost Tord Selamb dear.</p>

<p>At last Peter struggled up the hill panting, and knocked
at the door; he was greeted by an infernal barking from the
brutes inside.</p>

<p>Tord had been watching Peter the whole time from the
window, but had not cared to go and meet him. Such is
the custom of the skerries! And then, he did not want to
appear too eager, poor fellow!</p>

<p>The first evening they did not talk business, but they
drank the whiskey Peter had brought. But he broke up
early. He wanted to get up early to shoot duck.</p>

<p>So at dawn they lay out at Kallö skerries, which belonged
to Järnö. In front of them lay the grey sea with smooth
patches to the lea of white drifting ice floes, where the little
waves lapped the point of land and the silly eider decoys
nodded in their wooden way and pretended to be alive. But
here Tord’s horror of business lifted a little. He felt a grim,
fierce kind of excitement. “This is the struggle for life in
all its hellish nakedness,” he thought, not without satisfaction.
“Here I lie in the icy cold on a primitive rock in an
arctic sea and wait for the opportunity to lure and kill.”
Under the open sky with a gun in his hand he felt hardened
and reckless, capable of any struggle. Yes, he even became
intoxicated at the crazy thought that Peter was in some way
in his power out here in the wilderness of Järnö. Where
it was a matter of deceiving himself he could be a poet
right enough, poor Tord!</p>

<p>But Peter lay there in his greasy old fur coat and peeped
at Tord with his cunning little bear eyes. He appreciated
those little, nervous twitchings which suddenly stiffened into
defiance. “But how mad is he?” thought Peter. “How far
can I go?” He made little frightened delicious guesses,
and he felt much easier in the region of his pocketbook.</p>

<p>Then a flight of ducks approached from the south. It
looked at first like a dark, billowing ribbon against a low,
bright rift in a cloud. Then it quickly became a stormy,
vibrating wave. The wind held its breath before this space-devouring
speed, which made sea and sky shrink. The
living wave swung around in a curve towards the decoys.
A confusion of wings beat the air to froth around their
heavy bodies. The ducks did not seem to want to descend.
All the same Tord had time to let go his two barrels into
the flight. Peter’s gun boomed a little later. His furs
were too heavy for him. The old gardener who lay concealed
with the boat was able to bring in three birds. “Of
course, one can get a shot in when Peter is here,” thought
Tord, with a certain bitterness. The fact was that he had
never had the patience to wait when he was alone. But
Peter loudly praised Tord’s shot and confessed that he himself
had missed.</p>

<p>They shot quite a lot of eiders and also longtailed ducks
later on in the day. Peter was lost in admiration. He
warmly praised the fine shooting and the wonders of Järnö
generally. He himself was a heavy-witted, clumsy, impossible
rustic whilst Tord appeared to be a master shot and
a splendid sportsman. And it ended in Tord, under the
influence of the several drinks, indulging in the wildest
bragging of his fierce, free, eagle’s life betwixt sea and cliff.</p>

<p>Then they returned home.</p>

<p>Dinner was quite festive. Dagmar had, in honour of
the occasion, put on some gaudy silk rags and had powdered
her nose. It was of no importance that her fingers were
sooty. Tord’s excited pride derived new strength from
the burgundy, the brandy, and the whiskey. He clenched
his fists and stalked to and fro between his bear skins and
elk heads in the high resounding hall. The firelight from
the burning logs flickered over his jersey, Lapp shoes and
untrimmed beard. He showed his contempt, with terrible
oaths, of the miserable herds that thronged the streets out
there in the town. He was the lonely, free, scornful ...
superman. He recognized no other relations and friends
than the sea, the wind and infinite space.</p>

<p>Peter also seemed to be very far from claiming the
honour of relationship. He shrank up in his seat. He
enjoyed doing so before the magnificent Tord. He was
not well, he was dusty, worried, tired. Business worried
him. There was no difficulty in making oneself small if
only one’s pocketbook grew fat in the process.</p>

<p>They did not talk of Tord’s affairs.</p>

<p>Three days of constant drinking passed. Then Peter
suddenly got it into his head that he must go back home at
once. He had a great big bill falling due the following
day. He groaned over that bill as he was packing up his
things. He had still not said a word of Tord’s affairs.
“You begin, old man,” he thought.</p>

<p>Tord stood there with a sick headache and bit his lips.
“Cash! Cash! Cash!” throbbed in his head. It was sickening
to talk money after all his wild, eagle-like boasting. He
caught hold of Peter’s arm in a way that rather resembled
pinching:</p>

<p>“Well, curse you, what about my letter?” he cried.
“What will you give for my shares?”</p>

<p>Peter shrank more than ever, smaller and smaller until
he was like a little grey mouse:</p>

<p>“Buy shares? Impossible! These are not the times
... I have no ready money.”</p>

<p>“Why the devil did you come here then?” Tord said
brutally.</p>

<p>Dagmar went about tidying up with a fur coat on top of
her chemise and her hair down:</p>

<p>“What a polite host!” she laughed.</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose I’d better clear out at once,” whined
Peter.</p>

<p>For once Tord said something sensible.</p>

<p>“All right, I will come in with you to talk to Stellan and
Laura about the shares.”</p>

<p>Peter suddenly became very thoughtful. He sat down
at a table and began to calculate in a small greasy notebook:</p>

<p>“I might try to renew that bill, and then I could perhaps
help you,” he mumbled.</p>

<p>Tord had an instinctive feeling that his last proposal
had been the best one, and that he ought to talk to his
sisters and brother. But he did not stick to it, so incurably
lazy was he.</p>

<p>“Well, what will you give?” he asked in a voice that was
thick with excitement.</p>

<p>Peter writhed. He seemed quite in despair.</p>

<p>“I might risk about fifty thousand.”</p>

<p>Tord thought it sounded too absurdly little compared
with what he had received before.</p>

<p>“Damn you!” he shouted.</p>

<p>Peter began again with an injured expression to pack
his bag. And Tord asked Dagmar to bring out his town
clothes.</p>

<p>“Sixty-five thousand,” Peter suddenly ejaculated.</p>

<p>“A hundred thousand!” Tord hissed through the gap in
his teeth.</p>

<p>Then Peter felt a wild joy. But it was deep, deep-seated.
Not a spark of it came to the surface. He took out his
shapeless pocketbook and slowly counted out seventy-five
notes of a thousand crowns each.</p>

<p>“That is all I have with me.”</p>

<p>Tord suddenly closed. Such is the power of cash over
weak minds. And of course he could not know that Peter
had exactly the same amount in his other pocketbook.</p>

<p>But he had scarcely signed Peter’s paper and parted with
his shares when he felt that he had been tricked.</p>

<p>“Clear out now, you cheat!” he shouted. “And don’t
come near Järnö again, because if you do you will get a
bullet in your head.”</p>

<p>And Peter quickly disappeared with the old gardener,
who was to sail him over to the steamer. He calculated
that he had earned about two hundred thousand on this
stroke of business. But it had been too easy. He felt
almost uncomfortable as he sat there huddled up on the
lee side and looked out at the calm April day. Yes, there
was something uncanny in a Selamb having such wretched
ideas of business.</p>

<p>Tord did not go into town to put his seventy-five thousand
in the bank. He kept them out at Järnö. No signing
of papers, no hanging over a counter. The money
must not link him to the town, the community.</p>

<p>“Now I am free,” thought Tord, “absolutely free....”
He went out to devour the living spring. Alone like a
cock he walked about and endeavoured to seek inspiration.
Yes, now the moment had come when Tord Selamb would
become a poet.</p>

<p>But alas! no notes would come. He had a big grey lump
in his chest that would not melt. His work, his cursed
masterpiece simply oppressed him like a quintessence, a
rude microcosm of his vague conceit. There came cramp,
but nothing else. And it was not easy to go about with that
cramp in the wild teeming life of spring....</p>

<p>May is once and for all not a month for the Selambs.</p>

<p>It was already growing summerlike. Tord came to meet
it with staring, feverish eyes and a thin emaciated face.
He began to keep to the sea more and more. It seemed as if
the soil burnt his face.</p>

<p>It had been a long, wet, windy day, but towards evening
the clouds lifted a little and it grew calm. Tord rowed
out over the great shallow bay covered with reeds and
with only a narrow passage out to the big buoy. From
the wet oars and thwarts arose a damp chill. The shores,
already beginning to look mysterious in the twilight, echoed
back the flapping of the cuckoos’ wings. When Tord bent
over the side he could imagine the brown, tangled swamp
of lakeweed down there in the shallow water. But above
him in the cool endless depth of the sky there glowed
a chaos of vanishing cloud, flung out by the storm but
now forgotten and left to the stillness. There were
clouds that had stiffened in every gesture of perplexity,
of terror and of suffering, clouds on the whipping post,
clouds on the rack, clouds that had had the “Swedish
draught.” But all seemed to have died in torture.</p>

<p>Mute immeasurable disruption.</p>

<p>Tord rested on his oars. He felt it to the very bottom
of his being, this disruption. The cramp suddenly relaxed
within him. He felt a strange, shivering relief. Then he
rowed homewards, but slowly, carefully, as if he were
afraid of breaking everything with his oars. Afraid to
meet anybody, silently as a thief he stole into his house,
crept up to his bed and fell asleep voluptuously tired with
the sky beneath his eyelids.</p>

<p>At dawn he awoke and at once sat down to write with
this mute, wild disruption still within him.</p>

<p>His poetic rapture lasted for several weeks. It was a
wonderful joy at last to be able to pour it forth, to reveal
himself, to shout out all he felt, to take revenge on all
the thousand impressions that had weighed him down to
earth with their luxuriant wealth.</p>

<p>When Tord was not writing he wandered about with
staring eyes and careful, groping steps, as if he were fragile
and afraid to fall to pieces. If Dagmar spoke to him
he told her to shut up, though in an anxious, almost gentle
voice.</p>

<p>Tord had already filled a tremendous packet of notepaper
when his imagination suddenly dried up one long,
gloomy, wet day. He sat down to copy it out, but he had
some difficulty in finding the way in the maze of his own
inspiration. What did they really mean, all those strange
figures resembling a barometric curve during a storm or
the seismograph record registering an earthquake? Certain
after-echoes of his inspiration and an infinite reverence
for his own Selambian genius helped him, however, over
the worst. Only here and there a brief humdrum phrase
crept in to make it more intelligible and as a sacrifice to
the philistines.</p>

<p>On an absolutely still, sultry day in July, with distant
thunder in the air, Tord copied out with trembling hand
the last line of his poem. Then he rushed out into the
kitchen and tore Dagmar away from the stove, where she
stood in her chemise and an underskirt with her pipe in
the corner of her mouth, cooking sausage for supper.
He trailed her with him into the bedroom, forced
her into a chair, pulled down the blind, and began to
read.</p>

<p>It was unrhymed verse, of course, in the shortest possible
lines, abrupt sentences and inarticulate phrases. A
collection of exclamations, questions, curses, shouts of jubilation,
all expressive of Tord Selamb’s relation to woman,
the clouds, the sea, the lightning and the eagles.</p>

<p>Tord read with a hoarse, trembling voice. He seemed
to whisper the most extraordinary secrets of his life with
a wild emotion. And still, had he not, in the presence
of the uninitiated, been seized already at the very first
line by a terrible doubt? Was this ... was this really
poetry? He looked at his wife above the sheets of papers
with the eyes of a beggar, but of a mad beggar beseeching
prostrate adoration.</p>

<p>Dagmar responded rather badly to his expectations. At
first she looked a little embarrassed, almost like a child
when its parents speak of something it should not understand.
Then she looked at the door and mumbled:</p>

<p>“Pray excuse your slave, but I am afraid the sausages
will be burnt....”</p>

<p>“Let them burn then, idiot,” shouted Tord. After
which he continued his reading in a more threatening
voice.</p>

<p>Dagmar listened again. She sat quite still and good
for a long while. Then her mouth began to twitch quite
irresistibly, though she looked frightened.</p>

<p>Tord then hissed out the following lines:</p>

<div class="lg-container-b c011">
  <div class="linegroup">
    <div class="group">
      <div class="line">“In a blue flash of lightning</div>
      <div class="line in1">With a blue hissing sound</div>
      <div class="line in1">Creaking</div>
      <div class="line in1">Manly</div>
      <div class="line in1">Zig-zag</div>
      <div class="line in1">I saw it suddenly</div>
      <div class="line in1">The filth</div>
      <div class="line in1">The original filth</div>
      <div class="line in1">In the recesses of your body ...</div>
      <div class="line in1">Damnation</div>
      <div class="line in1">Unclean one!”</div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<p class="c003">“Splendid,” Dagmar snorted. “Thunder and filth!”</p>

<p>Whereupon she burst out laughing just as when Tord
came home with his teeth knocked out, a thoughtless irrepressible
feminine laugh, cruel without malice, pitiless
though with no ill-will. But Tord hated her at this moment,
hated her. She laughed! When she ought to have
sunk at his feet, and adored his genius, saved him from
doubt! Oh! the weakling’s dream of power is often far
more intense than that of the strong man. It is not the
bad poets who are the least devoted to their verses. Just
the line that most challenges the ridicule of the world
is often aglow with the most intense passion. Just the
very wretchedness of the form often reflects a seriousness
from which there has been no deliverance. Yes, the bad
poets are the unborn children of emotion. Their sufferings
are cruel. People seem to them empty, blind, perverse,
malevolent. How can anyone laugh at red, flowing blood?
How can anyone help trembling in the presence of a volcano
in eruption?</p>

<p>Tord ran to the door and tore it open. His eyes shrank
and his beard shook when he looked at his wife:</p>

<p>“Get out,” he shouted. “Out with you into the kitchen.
That’s your place!”</p>

<p>And Dagmar went, without any such refinement as injured
pride, but with her heart suddenly filled with compassion,
a sort of slovenly, annoyed pity.</p>

<p>For several weeks Tord did not open his mouth. He
strolled about alone along his shores or locked himself
in to file away at his verse. His ambition soon discovered
the usual solace for the wounds and doubts of the hermit.
“I am too singular, too wildly original and deep,” he
thought. “They can’t understand me. I must fill out my
voids, if I want any followers. I must soften down, moderate
and chasten my verse.” So he sat down with intense suffering
to convert his poems to a more human note: a process
which really consisted in his striking out a few oaths and
putting in a few “ands” and “buts” instead of a simple
comma.</p>

<p>Then he sent in his revised work to a publisher in
Stockholm, this time taking good care not to read anything
to Dagmar. He had to wait a long time for a reply. Already
after the first week he sailed across to the store for
his post. Then he went every second day. As it was a
long way, he spent most of his time with the tiller in his
hand. In the end he did not trouble to sail home, but
stayed away in the harbour. And it was as if the store
had become his home.</p>

<p>Poor Tord! So little was his proud self-sufficiency
worth.</p>

<p>At last one day the storekeeper flung a parcel to him.
It contained Tord’s poems. They had been returned.
Pale and trembling with fury he staggered down to his
boat. He did not sail directly home, but roamed about
for several days among the skerries, calling the elements
to witness the shocking injustice he had suffered.</p>

<p>But at last he had to return to his home on the cliff,
which he saw wherever he sailed. His hatred began to
long for her, the woman. He must have somebody to
vent his spleen on.</p>

<p>There was something dark, startling and fierce in his
face when he stepped into the hall, without a greeting,
and flung himself down on one of the benches in the wall.
He could not even wait for an excuse for a quarrel. Dagmar
only needed to ask him where he had been so long
when he poured a torrent of abuse and accusations over
her. She was a stupid, dirty, greedy animal who couldn’t
help pulling a man down and degrading him. Yes, a short
time ago humanity had been a lot of scoundrels who would
not recognize his greatness, now he was pulled down and
degraded. Suffering knows no logic. He wanted to see
her suffer and groan and hate as he himself suffered and
groaned and hated. But alas! already long ago during
the loneliness of the cold winter’s evenings he had dulled
the effect of hard words. Dagmar did not even trouble
to get angry:</p>

<p>“Poor boy, so they have been returned,” she muttered.</p>

<p>Then he rushed up and struck her with his clenched
fist on her soft breast so that she fell to the floor. And
with her cry in his ears he rushed out and sat down in
a crack in the hillside. He stared into the gloomy darkness
that lay so close to his eyes and blended the sea and
sky to a lifeless mass. His hand shuddered after having
struck something too soft. But his outburst had not
brought him any relief. It was himself he had struck,
himself he had hated because he was not capable of doing
what he wanted to; because he had not the liberating sense
of form; because he was closed off from the great brotherhood
of souls. But his was a selfish self-hatred without
any spirit of resignation or reconciliation. There was
not a trace of self-conquest. And until he has overcome
himself a Selamb does not become a poet.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Now Tord sat mostly indoors absorbed in zoology. If
he sometimes went out shooting or fishing he locked up
the oars and the sails of the boats he was not using himself.
He was afraid of finding the house empty on his
return.</p>

<p>Already in early childhood Tord had turned to animals.
There was something of the timid idleness of the savage
in him. He was too lazy for most people. Perhaps already
then he felt a sentimental attraction to dumb animals,
which was natural in one who himself lacked the power
of expression. Now he fled to them again—in protest.
That was his attitude towards a coarse, degenerate humanity,
which did not understand how to appreciate him.
No! crows and common snakes are better! But Tord’s
new devotion to animals was without any sentimentality.
He enjoyed seeing them pursue and hurt each other. He
hunted them and killed them himself without hesitation.
And he studied them—scientifically, as he liked to imagine—in
thick folios and with knife and microscope.</p>

<p>It was a cool and sweet-smelling evening in spring.
Tord stood in a clearing in the open copse and waited
for a flight of woodcocks. The leaves were nicely wrinkled
like the fingers of a newborn babe and shimmered reddish
brown in the level sunlight. But Tord bit his lips together
and did not suffer as he did before in the spring. His
gun was his salvation. Now they were coming, flying low
over the treetops: “rrrt! rrrt! pisp!” It was the mating
call, the love flight of the male. Tord threw up his gun
and the warm body of the bird fell down among the tree
trunks. He hurried home, eager to examine his bag. The
little bird’s heart still beat when he plunged the knife
into it, its fibres still trembled beneath the glass of the
microscope.</p>

<p>It was a knife in the heart of the spring. There was
<i>revenge</i> in this Selambian thirst of knowledge.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>But soon Tord’s interest was caught in a quite special
way by a branch of the animal world that he had hitherto
overlooked—insects. He became in his own way a passionate
entomologist.</p>

<p>To Tord the study of insects was that of a diabolical
collection of caricatures. Here life and nature unveiled
their whole cruelty and amorality. On most parts of the
surface of the earth the spread of humanity has swept
away the most gorgeous forms of wildness and cruelty.
The larger animals seem on the whole rather tame. But
the little animals of the soil and the air our civilization
has, for the most part, proudly passed over. Here theft,
parasitism, poison-murder, crude cannibalism, and the most
terrible perversity still rage without check. Tord learnt
to observe and enjoy the jaws of the lion-ant in the
treacherous sandpit, the graceful poisonous thrust of the
hymenoptera, the erratic frenzy of the golden beetle, the
horrible life of the burning beetle amidst putrefaction,
the devouring by the female cross spider of the male after
impregnation. Yes, this was a lovely Lilliputian world.
The devilish struggle for existence at first seemed to him
a parody on this miniature scale. But as he penetrated
deeper into his mysteries the elements of parody disappeared
and only horror was left. The little animal males
grew in his eyes to gigantic creatures, still more horrible
because of the glistening stiffness of the cutaneous skeleton
that made them resemble living machines. They peopled
his dreams with horrible sights. They laid their parasitical
larvæ in the intestines of his thoughts. They became
the pretext and symbol of his new philosophy of
life....</p>

<p>In this way Tord Selamb soon fell into black naturalism.
He overlooked the fact that if, as he supposed, everything
was nature, this must also apply to our human reaction
against nature’s cruelty. And that therefore nature contained
within herself the correction of this evil. Horror
itself is in the last resort a promise. There is a profound
contradiction. But these are not Selambian truths.</p>

<p>What lies behind the Selambian egoism is the “blind
spot,” the blind spot of the soul. They are simply insensitive
to rays from certain directions.</p>

<p>During his studies of insect life Tord had a special favourite.
That was the praying cricket, Nature’s most exquisite
wonder. With her, his brooding spirit celebrated
its gloomy mass. One dark, sultry August evening he fell
a victim to her charm in old Henri Fabre, the Homer of
insects. Round the lamp there was a restless buzzing of
Daddy-Longlegs and grey night-moths that seemed to be
made of dust. He watched them, with a mixed feeling
of voluptuousness and sickness, blind themselves and burn
themselves on the hot lamp funnel. And then he read
about the praying cricket, and how with crossed front legs
and lifted head she seems to assume a pious attitude of
prayer beneath the nun’s veil of folded wings. But as
soon as a victim approaches she unveils herself. Then
she resembles a vampire, a flying dragon. Then the scissors
of her crossed legs open, she seizes a victim, much
bigger than she herself, and devours it as quickly as lightning.
Of course, she also seizes the opportunity of devouring
the male after mating. But—this is the exquisite point—it
has also been noticed how, during the very act of
copulation, she turns backwards and begins to devour the
male’s head. Yes, she positively devours him whilst the
hind part of his body continues to fulfil the function of
sex, till her greed has reached the most vital organs....</p>

<p>When Tord had come so far, he rose vehemently and
rushed in to Dagmar. His face was pale and wet with
perspiration and a mingled expression of disgust and triumph.
And without any preliminaries he flung the love
story of the praying cricket in the face of his wife:</p>

<p>“Do you hear, woman, she eats the male’s head? But
he goes on all the same, just goes on! Say, then, if love
is not stronger than death!”</p>

<p>Dagmar did not answer. She did not bother to understand
what he was saying. She did not care a straw for
his praying cricket. But she was frightened at his tone.
Yes, from that moment she felt a kind of terror of Tord
Selamb and of life out at Järnö.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VI<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">THE GREAT DINNER</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">Leaning against the polished black marble counter in
a magnificent new bank was standing a thin slightly
grey gentleman with a rigid haughty face. He was
rather pale, and in spite of the summer heat was dressed
in a closely buttoned-up dark frock-coat. He was Stellan
Selamb, ex-Captain of the Göta Guards, now landed proprietor.
He had suffered since his long shooting expedition in
Africa from the after effects of a malarial fever which
made him sensitive to chill.</p>

<p>Stellan wore mourning crepe round his arm. His father-in-law
had moved down to the aristocracy in the sepulchral
vault at Trefvinge half a year ago, not without having
first immortalized his memory by a donation to the House
of Nobles and in this way gaining posthumous admittance.</p>

<p>Stellan had arranged to meet Laura at the bank. He
felt quite comfortable in banks nowadays, since he no
longer had any bills to meet on their due date. He had
waited more than a quarter of an hour without showing
any special signs of impatience. He enjoyed the quiet
hum, the hushed murmur of voices, as in a temple. And
indeed the big vaulted hall supported on its massive polished
stone pillars was like a temple above his shining
silk hat. Behind the counter the bank clerks solemnly
officiated at the high altar of capital, to the accompaniment
of rustling bank-notes, ringing coins and the rattling
of the calculating machines that reminded you of eternally
revolving prayer wheels.</p>

<p>It was a temple raised to the real State religion. Above
its high copper doors there ought to have stood in thin
gold letters the one great word: “Possess!”</p>

<p>Here in the bank Stellan almost seemed to grow reconciled
to the thought of his new brother-in-law. At first
he had felt a pronounced discomfort when the news of
Laura’s marriage in Petersburg suddenly tumbled down
on him at Trefvinge. Her husband, Count Alexis von
Borgk, was a Finnish senator of the Bobrikov régime and
was a very well-known instrument of Tzarism in Finland.
And Laura had written that they meant to move over to
Sweden. Stellan did not need to see his wife screw up
her face to feel anxious concerning the reception of the
couple in society.</p>

<p>But Count von Borgk was rich, very rich, it was said.
And here in the bank Stellan felt, as I said before, a little
calmer.</p>

<p>At last Laura appeared through the swingdoors, smiling
light-heartedly, just pleasantly plump, perhaps a shade
more blonde than before. She was dressed in white, dazzling
white, from the silk ribbon in her hat to the tips
of her shoes below the rich folds of her skirt.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Laura dear! Congratulations. It was
a surprise!”</p>

<p>“For me too,” said Laura and smiled her most innocent
smile. “I had positively no idea I was going to get
married. But why does Your Highness give audience here
and not at Trefvinge?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I wanted to meet you alone the first time.”</p>

<p>“I see—and Elvira detests banks, doesn’t she...?”
Laura looked round and turned up her nose a little: “Well,
so here we are back in this gossipping hole. And I who
felt so happy in Petersburg! Asia, that’s the place for
me!”</p>

<p>Stellan blinked his eyes somewhat nervously:</p>

<p>“Why did you not stay in—Asia, then, my dear Laura?”</p>

<p>“I can understand that it would have saved Elvira some
worry. But Alexis has altogether withdrawn from politics.
And he does not feel at home in either Finland or
Russia. He is just selling his estates there. ‘I have saved
them from one revolution,’ he says, ‘but I should not succeed
in the next.’ He longs for the peace of Sweden.
It was the last negotiations that unexpectedly detained
him. He is coming next week....”</p>

<p>The bank began to fill up with people. Stellan proposed
that they should go down into the safe deposit
where he had some papers to look through.</p>

<p>It was quiet and cool down in the crypt of the Mammon
temple. The electric lights hung more heavily and more
motionless there than anywhere else in this catacomb of
wealth, where deeds of mortgages, receipts and share certificates
slept their sleep in hundreds and hundreds of
polished steel boxes in the walls, and where there were
discreet and comfortable little compartments for the devotions
of the worshippers.</p>

<p>Sister and brother sat down in one compartment.</p>

<p>“So this is your refuge nowadays,” said Laura. “Well,
but what about your Aeronautic Society and your ballooning?
I have looked in the papers but have never seen
your name.”</p>

<p>“No, I have given it up.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it is easier to go up with a hundred thousand in
debts than with double the amount in income. But you
still gamble in this little town, I suppose?”</p>

<p>Stellan shrugged his shoulders:</p>

<p>“I’ve given that up, too,” he muttered.</p>

<p>“But what in God’s name do you do then?”</p>

<p>“I cut off coupons and look after my malaria. But
it was not of me we were speaking, but of you. Where
do you intend to settle?”</p>

<p>“Well, not in the country, that is certain,” exclaimed
Laura, and one could see in her face that this point had
been the subject of discussions.</p>

<p>“So your husband wants to settle on an estate.”</p>

<p>“Yes, he imagines he does.”</p>

<p>“What if you should make a compromise and take
Selambshof.”</p>

<p>“Selambshof! That dismal old place! Are you mad?”</p>

<p>“Why not? The big house stands quite unoccupied.
Repaired and restored it might make a splendid home.
And then it would be useful to keep an eye on Peter. He
is getting too awful. There are always stories about him
in the papers.”</p>

<p>Laura looked at her brother coldly:</p>

<p>“The master of Trefvinge is afraid of the papers. And
so he wants to put me in as a lovely guardian for Peter.”</p>

<p>Stellan lowered his voice:</p>

<p>“There are other reasons too. Peter is, as a matter
of fact, beginning to go down hill. He is yellow and
flabby in the face and he doesn’t take care of himself.
If I am not mistaken something may soon happen. We
have great interests to guard.”</p>

<p>Laura suddenly became thoughtful. She swung the
gold knob of her white sunshade and looked as if she
were making calculations. She always did this when she
was serious.</p>

<p>Stellan had got his papers and the steel lid of his safe
closed with a bang:</p>

<p>“You needn’t say anything definite now,” he said. “I
will arrange a family dinner out there when your husband
comes. My man will have to clean up a little, as best
he can. And on a fine summer evening Selambshof doesn’t
look so bad.... Well, we shall see.”</p>

<p>Laura nodded silently. As a matter of fact over there
in the East she had boasted a little of her social relations.
Count von Borgk had perhaps partly married her in order
to be introduced to the aristocratic circles of Sweden. And
that is why she wanted Selambshof to appear as attractive
as possible.</p>

<p>They left the vault.</p>

<p>Up in the bank they met Levy with a black portfolio
under his arm and surrounded by a crowd of business
friends. He was pale, handsome, and still wore his old
exquisitely ironical expression. He hurried up and bowed
to Laura.</p>

<p>“Congratulations, Countess von Borgk! Is it true what
people say, that you won your husband at roulette?”</p>

<p>Levy was his old self.</p>

<p>Laura tapped him on the shoulders with her sunshade
and laughed unconcernedly. But Stellan looked stiffly
after the Jew as he disappeared in eager discussion with
his company.</p>

<p>Sister and brother stopped for a moment at the corner
before they said good-bye:</p>

<p>“That fellow Levy is making up to Hedvig, I think,”
Stellan mumbled. “The winding-up of the estate took
an enormous time. They say he still appears out there
at Lidingön.”</p>

<p>There was a malicious flash in Laura’s eyes:</p>

<p>“Hedvig? Poor fellow!”</p>

<p>“It would not be exactly pleasant to have Levy in the
family, don’t you think so?”</p>

<p>Laura stood there in shining white and without a trace
of a flush.</p>

<p>“No ... perhaps not....”</p>

<p>“It would be best to give Hedvig a hint—tactfully—that
Levy is—second hand....”</p>

<p>“Nonsense, just frighten her and tell her that Levy wants
her money. That will have more effect!”</p>

<p>Then they separated.</p>

<p>“Ugh,” Laura mumbled as she walked about in the
sunshine outside the Grand Hotel, “ugh, how moral Stellan
has grown.”</p>

<p>From which you can see that everything is relative in
this world.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Peter stalked home from his tailor. It was Stellan who
had forced him to order a new suit of evening clothes
for the family dinner.</p>

<p>Peter had at first obstinately refused. It seemed to him
a matter of honour not to betray his greasy old evening
coat. Not till Stellan had promised to pay the bill did
he give in.</p>

<p>“Tell the tailor you have won the suit as a bet,” Stellan
hissed out. “It is unnecessary to show people what a
mean beggar you are!”</p>

<p>Peter took his revenge by ordering the most expensive
things he could get hold of.</p>

<p>He was walking homewards one sultry August night,
yellow in the face, bent and heavy. His head, which had
always been a little askew, had sunk between his shoulders.
He walked on the edge of the foot path, staring at the
paving stones, and carefully avoided stepping on the joints,
so that sometimes he took gigantic steps and sometimes
proceeded with a ridiculous strut. It was always so when
Peter went pondering over business.</p>

<p>Twice he stole into small bars and had a glass. The
further he came out towards the suburb—his suburb—the
more slowly he walked. He stopped at a row of houses
that were being built in a blocked up suburban street
that was under repair and from which you could see the
tops of the masts in the Ekbacken shipyard away in the
background. These houses lay silent and deserted. Their
uneven brick walls glowed in the last rays of the sun high
up above the chasm of the street. But in the empty
window-holes the heavy twilight floated and he visualized
all the struggles and mean worries that would soon be
housed there. Peter stood in the raw chilly draught from
the gaps in the walls and thoughtfully stirred a big trough
of mortar with his stick. His expression was at the same
time one of disapproval and contempt. “Don’t build,” he
muttered, “don’t build! Buy from those who have built
beyond their means. Houses are worst for those who
have them first. Quite different from girls, ha, ha! But
then they are good, damned good. No shares and such
rubbish for me. What is it they say about a thief? Yes,
he is one who has not had time to promote a company, ha,
ha! No, land and bricks are better. Both real bricks
and those that have engraved on them ‘robur et securitas.’”</p>

<p>After this monologue Peter stalked on in the twilight.
He then came to a rather wild and queer patch of stony
ground which most resembled the scene of a devastating
battle. It was here that the country and town skirmished
with each other on a battlefield that was never cleared,
full of blown-up rocks, rubbish heaps, bottomless fragments
of road and fields brown and intersected with a
deep trench. The town had pushed forward its apparatus
of siege: stone-cutters’ sheds, metal-crushers and dynamite
boxes. The country obstinately defended its retreat by guerilla
troops of creeping nettles and dock leaves, whilst one
or two dried-up dusty pines represented the remnants of
the main army in retreat.</p>

<p>And over it all whirled the crows, the ravens of the
battlefield.</p>

<p>But Peter was the marauder in this war. From each
onward push of the town he would creep home with fresh
booty of war. He strolled among the rubbish and interposed
his coarse signature between those of the buyer and
seller. And woe to him who had ventured too far in the
heat of the moment. They were his victims at once.</p>

<p>Peter struggled panting up a mountain of road metal.
He stood up dark against the red evening sky, a grinning
and spying evil spirit on a pedestal of millions of broken
fragments of stones. He looked out over the masses of
houses of the town. They were enveloped in smoke,
smouldering like a weary brain after a long working day.
The very air around them seem used up and tired. Yes,
there the stupid town lay and sweated and converted Peter’s
rocks into gold. It paid dearly for its work. And still
there was no gratitude in his glance as he looked down
upon it from the macadam mountain, but rather something
resembling inveterate distrust and aversion. The town,
the community, and the public were there to be cheated
and that was all. This was the doom pronounced on the
honest old granite rocks and it made them less safe, less
suited for human habitation.</p>

<p>Then Peter turned on his heel and glanced at his own
domains. Then he saw the grey ribbon of a new road
stretched past red fences and high piles of wood, long
and straight as an arrow it stretched with neat, well measured
plots of building land on either side. Yes, it was
like following the columns of a cash book with safe entries
and solid credits. All the way to the big sandpit all
was well. But there Majängen began, Peter’s sore spot.
He fell in his own estimation as half involuntarily he
stared at that miserable agglomeration of cottages above
which even the sunset glow seemed sullied and decayed.</p>

<p>Peter was afraid of Majängen. For several years he
had not dared to set foot there. And his fear was shared
by all his neighbours and, as a matter of fact, by the whole
town. Yes, Majängen was a name of terror. Peter’s own
policy had long ago driven away all decent, honest people,
and now only the worst rabble lived there. In the twilight
they swarmed out of their holes, the Majängen roughs,
thin, pale, with their hands deep in the pockets of their
wide trousers and caps pulled down over their eyes. They
had a new style. Their slang and their types quickly took
possession of the comic papers, so that Peter and his like
soon began to talk the simple but expressive language of
their mortal enemies.</p>

<p>These youths conducted a bitter war against Selambshof.
They pulled down fences, broke windows, trampled on
garden beds. Their numerous thefts testified to their activity,
against which he tried in vain to defend himself
with fierce dogs and barbed wire. Safe in their immunity
from punishment and intoxicated with their success, the
hooligans of Majängen extended their raids to the outskirts
of the town, where epidemics of theft and brawling broke
out. But it was not enough that hooliganism, prostitution,
theft, damage to property and brawls issued from Majängen
as from an open sore, worst of all were the epidemics.
Diphtheria, scarlet fever and typhus succeeded each other
out there in the cottages and were a constant menace both
to Selambshof and to the town. These were Peter’s epidemics.
There were no drains, and in his greed he had not
given a hand’s breadth of land to those who wanted to
supply water and light to the community. It was a terrible
blunder that was to become both costly and dangerous
both to him and to the town. Now in the dog days there
raged again a terrible typhus epidemic which had caused
the loss of several human lives in the immediate neighbourhood
of Selambshof.</p>

<p>Peter crawled down from the heap of road metal as if
the very sight of the seat of plague were dangerous. As
usual, he returned by way of Ekbacken.</p>

<p>Slowly he walked past the fine house, where old Hermansson
had lived, and which was now used as a public-house
and for working men’s tenements. Down in the shipyard
he stopped below an old ghost of a brig that raised
its blackened rigging towards the empty space above and
whose riven sides disclosed serious rot. Here, as usual,
his temper improved. Why did Peter really like to walk
about among the tarred shavings or to sit and ponder over
the rough weathered logs on the stack? Why did he continue
this business, which, even if it did not quite run at
a loss, was still of no importance? Did he perhaps after
all enjoy the shadow of honest and productive work that
lifted its languishing head here on his fine shore property—which
increased in value from year to year? Or did he
keep the yard going from a pious memory of Herman and
his first good stroke of business?</p>

<p>Then he came down to the pier, the long rotting, shaking,
pier which still, as if by miracle, held together. Out there
on the seat two figures were visible against the dark smooth
water, one bent and huddled up and the other thin like a
boy, with straight back. One was, of course, Lundbom,
the old fixture Lundbom, who was still able to keep the
books. But the other? It was funny how he reminded
you of poor old Herman! But it must be Georg, Laura’s
Georg! It was not the first time Peter had seen the tall
lad wandering about here on the quay, talking to the workmen
and old Lundbom. “Let me see,” thought Peter, “what
if the fellow is planning some trouble for Laura.” And
this thought brought him a certain satisfaction. For his
own part he did not feel any remorse or the least unpleasantness
at the sight of Georg out here. It simply did not
occur to him that he had once wronged his father. He
thought rather with a certain phantom-like return of sentimentality
of the twenty thousand that Herman had with
him when he left. “Well, yes, I saved the slam for him
anyhow, I saved the slam.”</p>

<p>Of Herman’s fate in America he had during all these
years never heard a sound, he did not even know if he was
alive....</p>

<p>At last Peter reached the avenue leading up to Selambshof.
He now walked slowly and half reluctantly. The
evenings had grown very long in the bailiff’s wing. And
he did not dare to call in the coachman now when Stellan’s
cursed butler was there in the main building....</p>

<p>It was very dark under the dense old elms. Just over
his head Peter saw a narrow strip of sky and some faint,
twinkling stars. Then he heard steps and whispers in the
garden. Holding his stick tight and feeling quite revived,
he crept behind a scraggy tree trunk.</p>

<p>The old fence creaked and suddenly several boys came
jumping over the ditch beside Peter. He got hold of the
nearest whilst the others disappeared quick as lightning
in the dark. Aha! Apple thieves! The boy had his
pockets full of unripe fruit.</p>

<p>“Damned rascal!” roared Peter. “You damned rascal!
I’ll give you something for stealing.”</p>

<p>And he struck the writhing figure with his rough
stick.</p>

<p>A long, terrible, shrill scream rent the close air. And
then Peter suddenly felt the pain of a bite in his arm. He
did not let go, but puffing and blowing he dragged the boy
with him into the office, where he locked the door and lit
the lamp.</p>

<p>“Here nobody will hear if you yell,” he mumbled.</p>

<p>But when Peter came up to the boy again with the stick,
he was startled at something in his pale dirty face, distorted
with crying:</p>

<p>“Where do you come from?” he mumbled.</p>

<p>“Majängen.”</p>

<p>“Who are your parents?”</p>

<p>“Mother washes....”</p>

<p>“What’s her name?”</p>

<p>“Frida Öberg!”</p>

<p>Then the boy suddenly stopped sobbing and stared Peter
boldly in the face with an impudent, horribly precocious
look that seemed to indicate that he knew all.</p>

<p>Peter had the sensation of horrid nakedness, of bare
shivering flesh. It was as when in a nightmare you suddenly
find you have forgotten your trousers. But at the
same time he was afraid to betray himself by a hint of
weakness. So he seized the boy firmly by the ear and led
him to the door:</p>

<p>“Don’t ever steal apples again,” he muttered. “It’s ugly
to steal. I won’t thrash you any more this time.”</p>

<p>Quick as a flash the boy disappeared from his grip and
was swallowed up in the shadows of the trees. But from
the thick silent darkness Peter at once heard a shrill, sharp
voice, mad with fury but at the same time pitiful and terrible:</p>

<p>“You damned carcase. I’ll pay you out for that, you
damned old carcase!”</p>

<p>Peter closed the shutters. He had long ago had shutters
put up. Then he sat down under the lamp and examined
the bite in his arm. And he was frightened, frightened as
a mouse, of infection from Majängen.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Then the day of the great family dinner arrived.</p>

<p>Between resplendent footmen the carriages and the motor
cars drove up over the newly-weeded and freshly-raked
sand-covered ground in front of the house. For many
reasons they had avoided the daylight and chosen the twilight,
which concealed the worst neglect.</p>

<p>Peter had received strict orders to behave decently. He
stood in the hall underneath an improvised decoration of
antelopes’ heads and negro weapons—trophies from Stellan’s
African shooting trip—and received the guests. In
his new evening dress he felt like a foot that has gone to
sleep in a tight boot. He had pins and needles in his whole
body. The thought that he would eat and drink as much
as he liked quite free of charge could not overcome his fear
of Count von Borgk, whom after all these magnificent preparations
he imagined to be some sort of wonderful superman,
so covered with orders that any other poor devil would
feel quite naked in the region of the left lapel. But Peter
calmed down when the newly married couple arrived at
last and the Count proved to be a gentleman whom Laura
could have hidden away in her décolletage. Yes, he was
a little dark gentleman with soft eyes, that avoided looking
into other people’s eyes, and with an expression round the
mouth that was both suffering and sensual. He had thin,
hairy hands which seemed to melt away when you shook
hands. He spoke a low, sing-song Finnish-Swedish with
a certain admixture of Slavonic softness and suppleness.
And his dress coat was bare, quite bare over his
heart.</p>

<p>It was strange to think that this was the hated and feared
Count Alexis von Borgk, accused by exiled Finns of a
perverse betrayal of his country and of coarse political
sadism. Was he one of those neurasthenics of authority
who are only able to breathe amid the cold momentous
gusts of world politics? Was he one of those
strange heraldic beings who are irresistibly attracted by
the austere magnificence of a throne; who are linked
to the forces of reaction by emblems and ceremonies? Or
was he perhaps a weak dreamer who had fallen a victim to
the mystery of panslavism and who had nothing but the
grey spleen left for anything so mean as a Grand Duchy
with a few million souls? Anyhow he was now a man who
could no longer retain the post he had chosen, but had
retired, having all the same suffered and sacrificed something.
A son by a previous marriage with a Russian had
fallen in the Russian-Japanese war just after he had been
commissioned lieutenant.</p>

<p>But Laura was not in the least affected by this. She took
her husband playfully. The Countess had really escaped
from the skirmishes of life with surprising ease. Her smile
had kept its impertinent freshness. She still continued
to look as if she had just got out of bed, and had a little
of the warmth of the bed left. And her skin was in some
strange way more naked than that of other ladies. This
evening a lot of jewellery with some cold green stones
shimmered on it, but no pearls. Pearls did not suit her,
she thought. Did she perhaps realize that their soft roundness
and mellow sheen are symbols of quite a different
sort of womanliness?</p>

<p>Among those who did not know her, Laura always created
a sensation by having Georg with her. They had not seen
him for years and had almost forgotten his existence. And
now he suddenly appeared on the scene, a tall, well grown
lad of sixteen, dressed up in his first dress shirt and dress
coat and still quite shy and confused by this unexpected
promotion after years of oblivion and neglect. He was
really very like his father, Georg, so like that one
was almost startled. There was something open, honest,
straight-backed, that the Selambs regarded as stupidity,
but with a new admixture of grit and determination that
made all except Laura think. She seemed to be merely
content with her new possession. Imagine that that overgrown
schoolboy in his ridiculous knickers and worn
sailor’s blouse should turn out so presentable. Yes, these
last days Georg had been paraded, introduced, boasted of,
and spoilt. She went with him everywhere just as in the
recklessness of love you would show off a new lover. Perhaps
it may, as a matter of fact, have been a whimsical
motherly falling in love. Perhaps something reserved,
even hostile in her son had awakened her feminine desire
for conquest. Or was it only secret anxiety born of the
glance of shy, uncomprehending fear that Georg first cast
upon his new stepfather?</p>

<p>They went in to dinner.</p>

<p>Stellan and his butler had really worked marvels. The
shabby old dining-room at Selambshof was impossible to
recognize, thanks to a soft wine-red carpet, expensive
sconces, handsome high backed chairs, exquisite table silver,
and plenty of white orchids.</p>

<p>But it looked all the same as if it was going to be a silent
dinner. They were mute after the first nervous talk. They
stared at the batteries of untouched glasses in front of each
chair as if they signified a troublesome journey with many
hardships. Mrs. Elvira sat cool and thin in her armour
of jet and black silk and breathed reserve from every fibre
of her body. And Hedvig Hill seemed a monument of
silence. Words seemed to shrink and freeze away in her
neighbourhood. Everybody seemed to be afraid of the
wine going down the wrong throat after Peter’s awkward
speech of welcome during the soup. All except Laura.
She continued, apparently unconcerned and gay, her little
flirtation with Georg.</p>

<p>“Your health, Georg dear!”</p>

<p>Georg drank to her attentively and obediently, carefully
sipping his glass:</p>

<p>“Put a white orchid in your buttonhole.”</p>

<p>Georg obeyed again. Laura threw a kiss to him: “Just
look how sweet the boy looks!”</p>

<p>Georg grew purple in the face and looked at his plate.
Laura clapped her hands:</p>

<p>“And he blushes like a little girl!”</p>

<p>Count Alexis followed this flirtation with languid eyes
and a little tired smile:</p>

<p>“Well, that is something our good Georg has not inherited
from you.”</p>

<p>Evidently the Count had no illusions.</p>

<p>Then there was a new silence, only interrupted by the
almost inimical ringing of glasses and knives. But Laura
did not give in. She looked about her with bright defiant
eyes. Then she suddenly turned to Hedvig and began to
talk of Levy. It was really deliciously impudent of her
to start just that topic. Laura teased Hedvig a little about
her lawyer, warned her in playful phrases against his business
genius and then said a few malevolent little truths
about Jews in general.</p>

<p>“You see Alexis is an anti-Semite and I’ve caught it from
him,” she ended up with a soft smile.</p>

<p>Hedvig answered nothing. She only turned white in the
face. Even her perfect bare shoulders grew whiter and
seemed to radiate a chill through the dark velvet of her
dress. But her black eyes stared with a shy irresolute
hatred into her sister’s restless eyes.</p>

<p>Stellan was afraid lest Hedvig should suddenly tell Laura
some awful truth; he was so afraid that his glass jingled
against the plate as he raised it. But Laura had already
noticed a haughty expression of disgust on Elvira’s face
and turned at once to her sister-in-law. She began innocently
far far away in Africa, on the Nile, during Stellan’s
and Elvira’s famous wedding trip. From there she went
over to the little panther cubs that they had brought home
and which she had seen during her call at Trefvinge. Yes,
they were too sweet, those little panther cubs, though she
for her own part would never have dared to take them in
her arms and play with them now that they had grown so
big. But Elvira had been like a mother to them from the
beginning. It was really delightful to see her with her
little twins, so one could imagine worse results from a
wedding trip....</p>

<p>That was one for Elvira. If Laura had torn off her
clothes and pointed at the scars after the operation knife
it could not have been more obvious. But the lady of Trefvinge
Castle did not move a muscle. She only muttered
quite low—so low that only those nearest to her could
hear:</p>

<p>“My dear Laura, now you have stayed long enough in
Africa. It would perhaps be good for you to think of a
cooler place—say Siberia for instance.”</p>

<p>Laura did not trouble to catch the whisper. After her
last bravado she settled down and seemed determined to
be bored too.</p>

<p>Count Alexis seemed absent-minded during the last part
of the conversation. Now his soft and musical voice was
heard:</p>

<p>“I wonder if I might have some water.... No thank
you, not soda,—ordinary water....”</p>

<p>“Ordinary water?” grunted Peter, suddenly quite
amazed.</p>

<p>“Yes, thank you, if you have spring water.”</p>

<p>“Yes, certainly, ha, ha. There is certainly spring water!”</p>

<p>Stellan sent one of the servants for a jug of fresh water,
straight from the well.</p>

<p>The Count filled a champagne glass, sipped it a little and
leant slightly back with half-closed eyes:</p>

<p>“Water is so pleasant,” he mumbled. “It taste of nothing,
absolutely nothing.... And everything is so calm in
Sweden. You shoot so surprisingly seldom indoors or in
the streets. It is like a sanatorium. And all the ladies
look like nurses, charming nurses—except Laura of
course....”</p>

<p>Then Count Alexis’ glance fell upon Old Enoch, who
hung over the green sofa opposite him. He started as if
a real live person had suddenly stood up, as if there were
a hitherto unnoticed guest in the room.</p>

<p>“Whom does this excellent portrait represent?”</p>

<p>“It is our grandfather,” Stellan hastened to answer.
“Enoch Selamb, a landed proprietor. He was a clever
agriculturist in his day.”</p>

<p>The time was past when Stellan indulged in any playful
truths about his ancestors.</p>

<p>Peter had already in secret found time to drink a good
deal, and looked somewhat bloated.</p>

<p>“He was a damned rascal,” he cut in contentedly, “a real
old rascal. You couldn’t cheat him....”</p>

<p>He stopped when Stellan trampled on his feet and turned
back to his bird and his wine. But Laura skittishly made
the sign of the cross before her ancestor.</p>

<p>“Old Enoch is our patron saint,” she explained to her
husband. “He ought always to have a candle burning
before his picture—as before an ikon. Thanks to him
no Selamb can do really bad business.”</p>

<p>The Count’s glance travelled searchingly round the table
and then back to the portrait.</p>

<p>“Hm,” he mumbled, “one can see the likeness.”</p>

<p>There was a pause again and everybody felt old Enoch’s
looks directed towards him, even those who had their backs
turned to the portrait.</p>

<p>Peter ate and drank for the whole company. The dress
coat did not pinch him any more. By Jove, he began to
feel at home amongst the guinea-hens and the golden pheasants.
Yes this was not a bad show. “May I be damned
if I ever sat down with so much money before,” he thought,
“Here is Hedvig the Tragedy, who is worth at least three
millions. She is lost in her pile of notes as big as herself,
and there are Stellan and Elvira who are also expensive
creatures, even more expensive than Hedvig, at least five
millions if we count Trefvinge as worth three. And
Laura, the little minx, weighs as much, if it is true that
the Count has sold three big estates in Finland and Esthonia.”
And then there was himself, Peter the Boss ...
with Ekbacken and Kolsnäs and a big slice of Selambshof
and all his building land and houses. He was the worst
of them all, not less than eight millions. And that was
calculating absurdly low, almost as if for income tax returns.
He scarcely dared to confess to himself how much
he owned. And if he added it all together it came to
more than twenty millions. Or perhaps more correctly
thirty. Thirty millions. Peter rolled the figure in his
mouth, chewed it with the fowl, swallowed it with the wine.
Thirty millions, thirty millions....</p>

<p>He was not at all like King Midas. The gold agreed
with him splendidly.</p>

<p>But just opposite sat Stellan, thin, straight, scrupulously
elegant, with the set face of the retired gambler. He sat
looking at the row of untouched glasses in front of his
wife. All those fine vintages! An exquisite harmony in
colour from the golden green mist over the light sparkling
sunshine of the champagne and the glowing burgundy down
to the heavy brown dash of colour in the Malvoisier!
And all of it untouched, disdained. Oh what sort of a
creature had he bound himself to, thin, cold, fastidious,
sterile, incapable of life! Not even Africa had for a
moment raised her temperature above zero. Even her capricious
love of sport had suddenly been blown away when
she noticed that he had expected something of it. She
seemed nowadays to be exclusively occupied in being bored.
It seemed as if the staff of servants at the Castle had gradually
assumed all her functions of life. Stellan sometimes
felt a sort of fear of her, as of a lingering disease, a dangerous
languor. Yes, the disease of wealth is infectious.
He was already infected. And still he could think of
nothing but collecting more money, and more money. He
was afraid when he thought of anything else than money.</p>

<p>Stellan started. By Jove, they had already reached the
dessert. He absolutely must stand up and make a speech.
But how difficult it was to get out of the chair today!
“Supposing I refuse to tell a lot of lies about Laura and
the damned Russian,” he thought suddenly. “Supposing
instead I rise and propose a toast to—absent friends! To
poor Manne von Strelert who happened to shoot a hole
through his head. And to that decent fellow, Herman
Hermansson, who took a little trip to America. And to
Percy Hill, who died in beauty. And to von Borgk’s
boarders in the Peter-Paul fortress and in Siberia. And
to all the people we have kicked over and climbed up on.
Supposing I raise up Banquo’s ghost! That would be
exciting!”</p>

<p>Compassion was not one of Stellan’s frailties. He regretted
nothing, felt no remorse. He only felt stiff, isolated,
frozen, paralysed by melancholy irony. And when
he looked round the silent circles the others seemed to
him frozen also. It seemed as if they were all sitting
frozen in a gigantic block of ice, and only imagined that
they could reach each other with their thoughts, words and
gestures. That they breathed and moved was probably
only imagination. Really they were all dead, except Peter.
Nothing affected him. He belonged to those organisms
low down in the scale that can stand any amount of
cold....</p>

<p>Yes, it was a ghost-dinner. The great ghost dinner at
Selambshof. And from the wall old Enoch’s eyes stared,
stared, and stung. “That’s right, my children,” they
seemed to say, “now you are ready. Now I’ve got you.
Now you are inside my magic circle. And none of you
will escape, none....”</p>

<p>Stellan felt an emptiness in his head, paralysed, sick.
His glance wandered from one face to the other in the
circle. He scorned them, he saw through them, but still
he begged them for help. “If only I can get up out of
this cursed chair. If only I could get up out of this
cursed chair!”</p>

<p>Then his wandering glance suddenly fell on Georg.
Georg sat in his corner and looked lost and unhappy. An
honest young face. “Bah, you know nothing yet,” Stellan
thought, shrugging his shoulders. “What is straight will
be crooked, my young friend, and what is warm will grow
cold.” And he felt his lips move in a pitying smile. But
still he could not look away from the boy’s face. It was
as if he had suspected that here was something like a
crack in the wall of ice, a break in the magic circle. Yes,
deep down he felt a strange relief to see him, to notice
his timid protest against his stepfather, his anxious wonder
at his mother, and all reflected in a face that knew
nothing of dissimulation.</p>

<p>At last Stellan got up and made his well-balanced
speech to the newly married couple with a certain military
briskness in his delivery.</p>

<p>After all even lies have nothing but truth to live on.
And even the coldest egoism must in the end draw breath
beside whatever honour and goodness is left in the world.
Otherwise it would die of suffocation....</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Two days after the dinner at Selambshof, Count von
Borgk got typhus and was taken to a nursing home. At
the same time not less than three of the servants on the
estate fell ill, amongst them Peter’s housekeeper.</p>

<p>Peter was in deadly fear, and could think of no other
way out than to sail away immediately from all this misery.
He was already on his way down to his boat—Herman’s old
“Laura,”—which still lay at her buoy in the bay where the
bathing box was. But when he passed the well on the slope
below the terrace, he saw that the cotter pin was not in
its place in the little trap door at the foot of the pump.
Peter lifted the lid of the well and peeped down. It was
a shallow well and was now almost dried up from the long
drought of the dog days. He saw at once that the bottom
was covered with newspapers, dirty rags and unspeakable
filth.</p>

<p>Peter got up dizzy and sick. “Majängen!” he thought.
“The apple thief! Frida Öberg’s boy. That was what the
Count got for drinking water! That’s what he got for his
sanatorium!”</p>

<p>With a groan and a push of his massive body, Peter
seized the pump and pump-house in a mighty grip and
threw it down so that all might see that the well was
poisoned. Then he fled head over heels down the hill to
his boat and out towards the bays of Lake Mälare.</p>

<p>Count von Borgk’s condition did not at first cause much
anxiety. His temperature was comparatively low and his
strength seemed to hold out.</p>

<p>Laura felt normal again by and by after her own terror
of infection had passed. She telephoned each day to the
nursing home and sent flowers and little notes.</p>

<p>But as the time passed she found it more and more
difficult to find anything to write. She began to feel out
of sorts, listless, bitter. She had looked forward to some
pleasant weeks at the seaside and now she had to sit here
and be baked at the Grand Hotel in the midst of the
summer heat and the dead season.</p>

<p>That Count Alexis should immediately fall ill was not
a part of the marriage contract.</p>

<p>Laura consoled herself as far as possible with Georg.
During her long stay abroad he had been boarded out
in the family of a bank cashier. There he had a tiny
room about as big as a wardrobe, which just held his bed
and school books. The cashier and his wife were cold,
silent, nervous people who made a face if you talked aloud
or banged the door, but who otherwise left Georg completely
alone. Nobody during the last two years had asked
how he was doing at school. But this very forlornness had
awakened in him a defiant ambition that had kept him
up to the mark.</p>

<p>Now he moved to his mother at the hotel and they had
their meals in the big dining-room. It was an immense
change. Laura had to force him to help himself to the
fine food. He writhed on his chair and it looked as if
he were eating with a bad conscience.</p>

<p>Laura stayed in bed late in the mornings. Usually she
heard no sound from Georg until he came home breathless
for lunch. He had been out for a walk, he said.
Laura became curious. One morning she awoke early,
at eight o’clock, and stole into Georg’s room. It was
empty. And he did not return before twelve. When his
mother pressed him with questions, he suddenly looked
her straight in the eyes and answered vehemently that he
had been at Ekbacken....</p>

<p>Laura smiled a tart little smile and pulled together her
kimono which had opened and showed her silk stockings:</p>

<p>“Oh! are you so mad on boats?” she said.</p>

<p>The following day whilst Laura still lay in bed the
telephone on her night table rang. It was from the nursing
home. The nurse who spoke sounded very serious.
The Count was worse and incessantly expressed his wish
that the Countess should come to see him.</p>

<p>Laura felt a violent discomfort. She grew cold all over.
The thought of the nursing home made her sick. She
had not yet been there. She was afraid, mortally afraid
of long corridors, temperature curves, the smell of disinfectants,
groans, biers. Every fibre of her body shrank
back from the serious danger of infection and the nearness
of death. But all of a sudden she felt relief, a wonderful
relief. Georg! Yes Georg would probably go! With
trembling fingers she seized the receiver again:</p>

<p>“Oh! nurse, I should like to come. But I can’t, not
today. I am ill in bed myself. I feel most awfully dizzy.
But I will send my son.”</p>

<p>After which Laura tied a damp towel round her head
and waited for Georg.</p>

<p>When he came in she lay writhing on her pillows and
really looked rather ill. She caught hold of his hand and
pressed it violently:</p>

<p>“Georg dear, they have rung up from the nursing home.
He wants to see me. But I can’t trail myself there. I
feel so awfully bad. Will you go there and give him my
love, tell him how ill I am.”</p>

<p>Georg stood pale, hating the thought of going to the
sick bed of this feared and secretly detested stranger. But
he drew himself up. It did not enter his head to say
“no” on an occasion like this.</p>

<p>After some hours Georg came back. He had not been
able to give any message as the patient was unconscious.</p>

<p>Laura put no questions about the nursing home, what
the doctor had said, or how the patient looked. She only
heaped her gratitude on Georg and fawned on him like
a dog.</p>

<p>She probably felt she might need him again.</p>

<p>The next day the Count was still unconscious and then
Laura ventured to be a little bit better and to get up.
It was boring to stay in bed, and besides she had a superstitious
fear of pretending to be ill—she might really become
ill.</p>

<p>On the whole, she thought extraordinarily little of the
man whose name she bore. It seemed as if his illness had
obliterated all her memories, from the earliest society ones
to the latest exquisitely sensual; it seemed as if it had
made of him a remote half-hostile stranger.</p>

<p>Several days passed. There was no talk of any visit
to the invalid. He could speak to nobody, periods of
unconsciousness interchanged with periods of delirium.
Laura could no longer keep quiet or sit alone. She had
at last made some acquaintances in the hotel, a secretary
of the Danish Legation and a young widow whom she had
met at the seaside. They in their turn had introduced her
to a Russian musician who was passing through. So they
were able to have a little game of bridge up in Laura’s
sitting room in the evening.</p>

<p>“How is your husband getting on?” said the lady between
the bids.</p>

<p>“Oh, I was there today ... he is much better....”</p>

<p>Georg heard these words through the half open door.</p>

<p>Then the telephone in Laura’s bedroom rang. With a
sigh she dropped her cards and went in, carefully closing
the door to the sitting room. The Russian did not play
bridge, but was improvising on the piano.</p>

<p>Once more there was a terrible, pious, insistent voice
on the telephone:</p>

<p>“The Count is conscious again. He only mumbles your
name. He must speak to you. He can’t have long to
live. You won’t let him die quite alone....”</p>

<p>Laura’s voice sounded like a cry of distress, half in
despair, half in fury:</p>

<p>“Good God ... I ... I told you, nurse, that I was ill
myself ... that I am in bed ... that the doctor has
forbidden me.... But I will try to send somebody....”</p>

<p>She rushed in to Georg. She was pale, very much
décolletée, dressed in black rustling silk and covered with
jewels. She did not notice how her son quickly hid a
parcel under the table. She stroked him on his arm and
hand quickly and nervously.</p>

<p>“Dear little Georg, you must go to the nursing home
again! Alexis has become worse. I can’t bear to see
him suffer. My nerves are quite exhausted. Yes, it would
quite finish me. I have some friends here but they must
leave, they must leave at once.... I am simply
done....”</p>

<p>Georg turned away. Her perfume enveloped him. As
she bent forward he saw with a shudder her dazzling white
breasts move below her low-cut frock. He suddenly felt
a strange sickening shame that she should be his mother,
that he had sprung from her body. He jumped out of
his chair:</p>

<p>“No, mamma, you go yourself!” he exclaimed.</p>

<p>But she clung to him, moaned, begged, caressed, kissed
him. Yes, in her miserable panic she seemed to have forgotten
that he was her son and she was prepared to employ
all the artifices that a frightened woman can employ
in order to move a man.</p>

<p>Georg jumped up and pushed her away from him:</p>

<p>“Leave me alone!” he said, “I don’t want you to touch
me!”</p>

<p>Merely from anxiety and in order to get away from her
he at last rushed out for the second time to the sick
man.</p>

<p>Laura stood at the table with a rigid smile on her lips.
The danger she had escaped seemed to have numbed every
limb in her body. She pulled her shawl over her bare
shoulders. Her son’s contempt passed like a chill shiver
over her skin. Your own flesh and blood! Bah! The boy
was like wax in her hands.</p>

<p>She went into the sitting room. She walked slowly and
carefully. It seemed as if there were something cold,
frail and motionless within her, something that could not
bear a shock.</p>

<p>Laura excused herself to her guests:</p>

<p>“My husband is worse and I must go to him,” she said,
quietly and solemnly.</p>

<p>Appearances must, of course, be saved.</p>

<p>They said good-bye with many regrets and expressions
of sympathy. The young Russian musician had a refined
and a very sensitive face. He meant to kiss his hostess’s
hand but stopped half way and turned a little pale. As he
bent over this beautiful and robust woman’s body it seemed
as if he had suddenly been startled as before something
dead, before the stench of a dead soul.</p>

<p>Laura hurried to bed, took a sleeping draught and pulled
the bed cover over her head.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>Early the next morning she was awakened by the message
of the death of her husband. She first felt a strange
creepy sensation of relief. Now he would never call for
her again. Now she no longer need go and see him. Now
she could escape the nursing home....</p>

<p>But then she was seized by a bitter ague. Her nerves
at least had not forgotten him. A cold breath chilled certain
of her more intimate memories and the cold bony
fingers of death groped too close to her own spine. It
was like a poisoning of the senses.</p>

<p>Laura felt so out of sorts and so sick that she quite
believed she was mourning her dead husband and felt
keenly sorry for herself. She dressed in her plainest black
frock and sank down into an easy chair.</p>

<p>Then a tall thin man in a black frock coat, carefully
buttoned, and dismal folds on his forehead appeared ghostlike
on the scene. He was the undertaker. Laura told
him with a tired, an infinitely tired gesture, and in a few
monosyllables to address himself to her brothers at Selambshof
and Trefvinge. After which the gloomy looking figure
withdrew bowing solemnly.</p>

<p>Laura sank together. “I am an old woman,” she
thought. “Everything inside me feels so frozen and dead.
I am an old, broken, lonely woman. My life is finished.”</p>

<p>Then she suddenly thought of Georg. Good God, Georg!
She had forgotten Georg. Of course, she had Georg. She
was not alone. Her life was not finished. She had her
son, a big, handsome, clever, brave boy.</p>

<p>A glow of warmth surged once more through Laura’s
veins. A certain remorse for her previous indifference
and neglect stirred inside her. For once she really suspected
something of a mother’s feelings.</p>

<p>She flew into Georg’s room.</p>

<p>It was empty.</p>

<p>She sat down to wait. She sat on the edge of his bed,
fingering his pillow and his night shirt and got out her
watch every second minute. Never before in her life had
she really waited for any human being.</p>

<p>She called the chambermaid. She inquired of the waiter
and the hall porter. No, nobody had seen the young
gentleman. And still he had been sleeping in his bed,
you could see that.</p>

<p>Laura worked herself up into a state of nervous, shivering,
whining anxiety. Towards dinner time the hall porter
sent up a letter that had been left by a messenger boy.
It was from Georg and read as follows:—</p>

<p class="c012">To my mother,</p>
<p class="c013">I am writing to say good-bye. We shall not see each
other again. I had not meant to leave like this, but what
happened yesterday was too cowardly. I can’t stay any
longer. I am going to sign on as soon as I get a chance
and sail to America to find father. It is no good trying
to find me because I am sixteen years of age and I am
not coming back to you. I know all about how you and
Uncle Peter behaved to father. I know it through old
Lundbom and Sara, who was a maid at Ekbacken. She
is married to a workman in the yard now. Old Lundbom
believed in you at first but he was sorry when he understood
how everything had happened. Two years ago he
received a letter from father that was to be given to me
when I was sixteen. In it is his address and everything.
He is in a big office and has a rather good job, though
it was not so easy at first. He is a noble man, I know
that. It is for his sake I have been working so hard at
school because you have never cared for me before. So
now I am going. All the money I have got from you
is in the right hand drawer of the table, because I don’t
want to use it to run away with. Good-bye now. And
you must forgive me, for I cannot do anything else.</p>

<p class="c013">Good-bye!</p>
<div class="c014">Georg Hermansson.</div>
<p class="c015"><i>P. S.</i></p>
<p class="c013">If anybody does any harm to old Lundbom because of
this, they will hear from me when I come back!</p>

<p class="c003">Laura did not faint after reading this letter. She had
no attack of nerves, made no scene, did not stir up heaven
and earth to get her son back. She only suddenly felt
empty, quite empty. She no longer felt anxious for Georg.
She could not as a matter of fact understand her former
anxiety and eagerness for him.</p>

<p>She washed her face in cold water, powdered it, and
drove out to order mourning clothes.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">SHADOW PLAY</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">The spring was early that year. Through the windows
of the renaissance hall of the Hill villa the
May sunshine flowed calm and warm as in June.
But Hedvig, who was walking to and fro, had still retained
her winter complexion. Yes, the tragic beauty of her face
was deathly pale as she took a few steps to and fro like
a prisoner measuring his cell. She seemed slimmer than
ever and was still dressed in black. Like a dark shadow
she glided to and fro, to and fro, across the wine-red sun-bespattered
carpet.</p>

<p>Each time Hedvig came opposite to the little cupboard
on the wall where the telephone was concealed, she stopped
a moment with helplessly hanging hands and a restless,
anxious expression. By and by she approached the spot
more and more frequently and it seemed as if an irresistible
force drew her to the telephone. Then she stretched out
her hand to lift the receiver. But then a door banged in
the region of the kitchen and at once she withdrew her
hand as if it had been burnt, and she resumed her restless
pacing. Then everything was quiet again and Hedvig was
again at the telephone. In a low unsteady voice she asked
for a number. After which her voice with a tremendous
effort rose and became tense, haughty, commanding:</p>

<p>“May I speak to Mr. Levy?”</p>

<p>But the tension died away in a disappointed, dissatisfied
tone,</p>

<p>“I see, not in yet....”</p>

<p>Hedvig resumed her cell-walking. She mumbled to herself
and looked if possible even paler than before. Incessantly
she looked at the clock in despair that the minutes
passed so slowly through the silent and sunny room.</p>

<p>For the second time Hedvig was drawn to the telephone.
Now at last he had come to the office. The cool relief
suddenly made her voice indifferent, hard, businesslike:</p>

<p>“Good-morning! It is Mrs. Hill speaking. I only
wanted to remind you of those mortgages that were to
be attended to ... those in....”</p>

<p>Levy’s voice answered over the ’phone, stern and assured,
with an imperceptible note of satisfaction:</p>

<p>“Yes, of course, the mortgages.... Yes, that will be
all right.... I will come out to dinner, <i>if I may</i>, then
we can talk it over....”</p>

<p>It was not the first time Levy had invited himself to
dinner at Hill villa. Probably in the correct surmise that
his client would never be able to make up her mind to
do it.</p>

<p>Hedvig put the receiver down with a shrug of the shoulders,
a wretched false little shrug. She resumed her walking.
You could see how she tried to convince herself
that she was quite cool and indifferent now that her anxiety
lest he should forget the mortgages was over.</p>

<p>Her steps halted suddenly in front of one of the patches
of sunlight on the carpet. It looked as if she dared not
venture out on that red sea of light. It looked as if the
spring sun, which flooded the large silent room in ever
greater volume, had dazzled and paralysed her.</p>

<p>Good God! What was she to do before dinner? How
was she to occupy herself the whole of this long pitiless
radiant spring day!</p>

<p>She found no way out but the usual one—to fly to the
shadows. She rang the bell and ordered her car.</p>

<p>“Shan’t we begin with the open car soon, Madam?” said
Ohlesson, the chauffeur.</p>

<p>“No!”</p>

<p>So the big black covered car ran out to the cemetery.
And then Hedvig sat there on the seat by Percy’s grave,
from which she had not allowed the dry withered funeral
wreaths to be removed. Erect, motionless she sat under
her black sunshade, whilst all around the light May green
sparkled and swayed in the broad stream of sunlight. The
sun appropriated even Hedvig’s black silk cloak and made
it live and shimmer with a thousand colours. But her
face was only lit up by a faint reflection from below,
from the marble of the tomb.</p>

<p>It was more than a year and a half since Percy had
died, but lately Hedvig had begun to take refuge here
again. Here she fought her way back to the life of shadows,
a thin life, a continuation of their life in the sanatorium.
Not that she was able to forget even here on
the seat in the cemetery all that consumed her:—money,
business and everything connected with it. No, but she
thought of it with less anxiety. Rather with a solemn and
pious feeling that it was her duty to watch over what her
dear Percy had left behind....</p>

<p>There was something strange about Percy Hill. He
had been a poor invalid, and yet his character had been so
free from any mean fears that even long after his death
his memory acted as a sedative. As Hedvig sat there her
heart filled with quiet gratitude that she had been given
the joy of sacrificing some years of her life to him. She
no longer suffered for having lied to him and cheated him
in his last wish. She had only been the nurse who prevented
her poor patient from injuring himself. Her conscience
closed its eyes to the circumstances attending her
patient’s death.</p>

<p>No, there was no danger in sitting there whispering to
her memory, that sentimental liar. Her egoism was not
frightened of the past, but of the future.</p>

<p>What a challenge to all the powers of the spirit, this
feeble, mute, half-concealing lie in the midst of the clear
sunshine! It seemed as if the light in sudden anger had
surged around her with increased intensity; had sent a
fresh wave of burning restlessness through her body. She
rose and seemed to grope after the receding shadows. Then
with dazzled, burning eyes she staggered along the cemetery
path. Outside the gate her motor hummed, impatient
to rush her back to all that waited for her ... business
... Levy ... the future...!</p>

<p>“I won’t change,” Hedvig thought in the car. She found
there was something safe, reassuring, in the fact that she
did not intend to put on different clothes. But when she
came home she did so all the same. And she sat long
before the mirror. And then she stood in the window looking
down the road.</p>

<p>At last there came a car and Levy got out.</p>

<p>“Taxi,” thought Hedvig, as if she could blunt the point
of a threat with that prosaic reflection. Levy ran quickly
up the stairs. “Jew,” she thought, as if by doing so she
had kept something at bay. But all the same she had to
force herself to walk slowly, really slowly, out into the
hall to receive her guest.</p>

<p>Levy had brought some yellow roses.</p>

<p>“If there were black roses, I should give you them instead,”
he said.</p>

<p>Hedvig forgot the roses on a table in the hall on purpose.
She had a sensation that he flushed up for a moment beneath
his even pallor.</p>

<p>There were primroses and lilac on the dining-table.</p>

<p>“Those flowers don’t suit you,” he said with a quick
bitter smile. Then he turned to the maid who was serving:
“Take away those flowers and fetch my roses out of the
hall!”</p>

<p>He seemed quite at home.</p>

<p>Then Levy threw himself into business and made good
progress from the start.</p>

<p>Levy had made money live for Hedvig, too much so!
At first she had regarded her large fortune as a safe protection
against all the demands and dangers of life. She
sat huddled up in the middle of her gold heap where
nothing could reach her. But Levy had thrown out his
hands:</p>

<p>“Good God, what money! What a heavy shapeless mass!
What an old, moss-grown stump of a fortune! For twenty
years it has had to take care of itself. For twenty years
not a single experienced hand has touched it. It looks
like a fund for widows and orphans.”</p>

<p>“You mean that the investments are safe as a rock,”
mumbled Hedvig. “But surely that is a good thing!”</p>

<p>“Yes, but the interest, Mrs. Hill, the interest! You don’t
get much more than three and a half per cent. and you could
get six. You allow a hundred thousand a year to run
through your fingers. That is to make yourself a laughing
stock to God and man. As an expert I can’t bear to see such
an absurdity. Allow me to make some dispositions for
you. You can submit them for the approval of your
brothers.”</p>

<p>Hedvig worried and pondered long before she said yes.
But the hundred thousand were stronger than her fears.
And thus Levy had lured her into his world, the money-world.
She began by questioning him on all occasions
in a woman’s way, ignorantly, persistently, suspiciously.
And he would reply. He answered not only patiently but
willingly, quickly, ardently, enthusiastically. He explained
the whole economic mechanism of credits, bills, mortgages,
debentures, shares. The whole of this finely balanced
system of suspicion and confidence made a deep impression
on Hedvig. To her over-cautious spirit it seemed like
balancing on the edge of the abyss. His quick purposeful
assurance seemed to her something supernatural, almost
creepy. But she had to hear more and more. Oh, it was
deliciously exciting to hear Levy talk of money. It was
only now she began to grasp what money was. And she
felt as if she were in a swing, feeling giddy at the fact of
owning so much.</p>

<p>Yes, Levy’s interest became more and more eager. Hedvig
had already been lured from her gold-heap where she
had enjoyed the twilight. Her money was no longer like
a wall protecting her against the world. No, it was instead
a medium in which she moved about. It formed the thousand
connections, the tentacles and nerves thanks to which
she at once felt what was happening in the town, in the
country, in Europe, in the whole world.</p>

<p>Levy tore Hedvig with him half way into life, at least
into that kind of life which consists of movement and
business. He showed to her confined and numbed egoism
another kind of egoism that was world-embracing, intensely
awake and technically brilliant. He was the personification
of that egoism. It was something different from
Percy’s laissez-aller and cool, submissive irony. It was
wheels that rolled. It was diamond cut diamond. It was
power, destiny. Hedvig sometimes became quite frightened
at his passionate discourse, frightened as if she had come
out into the strong daylight without a dark corner to which
to retreat. And she no longer had her money to protect
her. It had become his confederate, it betrayed her to
him, it was in love with him. Hedvig had no way out but
to assume a forced reserve, a sudden cold, and sheer rudeness.
But that had no effect on him at all. He was insensitive
to everything which was not logic. Then in her
anxiety she crept behind her dead husband, draped herself
in crêpe, fled to the shadows and became just piety and
memory. That was the only thing that hitherto could
damp Levy’s eagerness. The world-embracing, hot and
cold romance of money shrank up violently and he became
gradually colder and colder, more formal and more ironical,
till at last he said good-bye with a bow that was really
a shrug of the shoulders.</p>

<p>So today Mrs. Hedvig had to assume her crêpe.</p>

<p>During the soup Levy raised the question of the mortgage.
That was a mere nothing, a bagatelle. They would buy
the house by auction, no doubt about that. It would certainly
be good business, because the house was, as it happened,
valued much too high. Other people are frightened
of houses that are assessed too high. But we are not,
Mrs. Hill. For we know of a certain little insurance company
that will take the house with open arms. They need
it on their books. A house that is bought for 200,000 but
can be taken up at 300,000 improves the position at once
by 100,000—not for the shareholders but for the Board
of Directors.</p>

<p>Levy’s face suddenly became contemptuous and almost
offended. This topic seemed to upset him. It was not
worthy of the occasion or of his feelings:</p>

<p>“Well, that’s that,” he exclaimed. “I am tired of the
house property swindle. That’s for inferior people, philistines
and small fry. I really can’t understand your brother
Peter’s taste. I admit that he has a brutal sort of natural
business shrewdness, but he lives like an old-fashioned
craftsman amidst modern improvements. Before 1905 we
believed that business consisted in cheating each other and
the State. Yes, I believed it too. But that is now old-fashioned,
hopelessly old-fashioned. Nowadays we have at
last grasped the fact that the really lucrative business is
the positive one in which money really makes a contribution....
That is to say shares, industrial shares! We
live in the age of a most tremendous industrial boom. The
whole world is becoming industrialised. You must be blind
not to see in which direction the royal road of capital leads.
Money and wheels are related. Shares, industrial shares!
Invest your money in forests, waterfalls and iron mines!
Send it to the saw mills, the harbours and the ammunition
works!”</p>

<p>Here Levy swallowed the third glass of mineral water
and broke out into a vehement flood of share quotations
and statistics of exports. And all the time he stared at
Hedvig with an expression that was at once appealing,
passionate, embittered and sceptical. He wanted to dazzle
her, make her enthusiastic, but there was something spasmodic
and almost despairing in his efforts. There was not
a spark of real and innocent joy in the present moment.</p>

<p>Did he see through her, this woman before him, or did
he suffer from the fact that the passionate pulses of his
heart were only capable of stirring the ashes of some dry
calculations?</p>

<p>Hedvig stared at the table-cloth. She felt his glance on
every point of her face and neck. His harsh, quick voice
at the same time opened up the whole world for her and
spun her into a net of supple meshes. It was already
as if she could not move hands or feet. He seemed to
her to come closer, closer. She intermittently felt hot and
cold in this strange heat with cold currents that streamed
out from his being. Quickly, relentlessly the terror rose
in her, the irresistible terror of seeing herself cut off from
any possibility of escape, overpowered.</p>

<p>She suddenly got up from coffee:</p>

<p>“Shall we not do the round of the pictures today?” she
said. “It is the first time it has been light enough after
dinner.”</p>

<p>The round of the pictures was an invention of Hedvig’s
fear. She felt safer amongst Percy’s pictures.</p>

<p>Levy rose slowly and offered Hedvig his arm. The tension
in his face broke down. He was evidently not pleased
to have to leave his own special field of attack and to
have to resort to a slow roundabout strategy in order to
fight with a dead man.</p>

<p>And yet Levy could certainly talk of art, in case of need.
He was a connoisseur in his own way and had a great
deal to say not only of market values but also of theories
and technique. There were various things here that he
could tell some malicious stories about, various things he
was prepared at once to slaughter with his criticism, but
also some things he had to admire. But it was a jealous,
inarticulate admiration. Levy bit his lip and kept silent.
To come up against the dead husband all the time made
him, Jacob Levy, barrister, embarrassed and uncertain of
himself. He knew much, but not how to battle with a
shadow.</p>

<p>Hedvig found time to breathe. And she at once started
the game of “Chinese shades.” It was really a game in
her own style, silent, stealthy, and unconsciously false.
She had had many and long rehearsals of it out there by
the grave. Every accent of her voice was reminiscent
of crêpe. Solemnly she advanced through the rooms which
the evening light was filling with its first pure tones of
gold. She stopped with head inclined before one picture
after the other. In every gesture, in every word, she
simulated admiration for her dead husband’s fine understanding
of art and for the modest, unselfish enthusiasm
that never failed in spite of exhaustion and suffering.</p>

<p>A good dose of almost religious piety was administered
to Levy. But he evidently did not like the medicine.
His pallor was tinged with green. His lips curved into
an imperceptible, nervous grimace. But he had to swallow
it all the same. It was only when they had come out
into the hall among the modern things that he suddenly
plucked up his courage again amidst these new, more reckless
and more highly coloured surroundings. With a
solemnity that was more austere than ever—perhaps because
it required more effort—Hedvig halted before an
animal painting, signed by a not unknown French artist.
The picture represented two tigers, as innocently striped
as if they had been painted by a child of five. They were
playing in a jungle which seemed to consist of a ragged
bouquet of dried grass.</p>

<p>Then Levy could keep silent no longer: “I know a
little story about that master,” he exclaimed eagerly. “Two
Parisian Jewish dealers had a good lunch together and
then went down to the <i>Salon des Indépendants</i>. And
there one of the Jews made a bet with the other that inside
a year he would take up and make famous any one
of the exhibitors. And the other Jew walked about a
long time searching till he found the most hopeless and
impossible painter in the whole gigantic exhibition. He
chose this painter. But the other was not frightened.
He quickly created for the tiger painter a new school of
art, which was dubbed ‘naïvism’ and in one year he became,
as a matter of fact, world-famous. There you see
the power of advertisement and of the Jewish genius.”</p>

<p>Of course Hedvig in her inmost heart understood Levy
much better than the picture. But we are all most sensitive
about our lies. And she also grew angry because
she felt again that she was losing her supremacy and began
to feel unsafe. That’s why she regarded his blasphemous
story as an insult to Percy’s memory.</p>

<p>“An artist may be great even though he has been run
by an unscrupulous Jew,” she mumbled. “This picture
was, as a matter of fact, bought before the Jews made
it expensive. And it was the general opinion amongst
my husband’s friends that it was a real find.”</p>

<p>Hedvig began an eager defence of the striped tigers and
the ragged dried grass. She used expressions that she had
heard on Percy’s lips during the art discussions down in
Montparnasse and from the time when he tried in vain to
convince her of the new ideals. She stole his phrases,
his catchwords, his characteristic abbreviations, his little
jokes and even his trick of bending his head on one side
and looking through half-closed eyes.</p>

<p>So the game of “Chinese shades” was followed by a plundering
of the dead. All that she could lay hands on was
now used as a weapon against the insistent Levy. Truly,
human beings play strange games with each other.</p>

<p>Levy suddenly looked very tired. There was something
pathetic about his raised shoulders. He had one of his
fits of inevitable truth-telling. But his quick, harsh voice
was unsteady:</p>

<p>“Why do you lie to me, Hedvig?” he mumbled. “You
were an enemy to all art whilst your husband was alive.
Yes, I know it. And you are still to this day indifferent
to all this. And all the same you let loose these striped
tigers on me. Why can you never be sincere, Hedvig?
Why are you so afraid that you must always lie?”</p>

<p>Hedvig froze up and was silent. Every nerve in her was
chilled. Never had anyone dared to come so near to her.
It seemed as if this man had dared to see more of her than
she herself had seen. She kept absolutely motionless like
an animal shamming death to escape a danger. And still,—did
she not feel far, far within a sort of wild relief,
something of the same kind as she had felt once when hearing
Peter’s cynicisms, though deeper, finer....</p>

<p>Levy stretched out his hand:</p>

<p>“Good-night! I am a little tired. I must go now. I
will look after your mortgage. Good-bye—till next time!”</p>

<p>And then he was gone.</p>

<p>Hedvig went to bed, though it was still daylight. She
was accustomed to go to bed immediately after his visits.
She longed to lie motionless on her back and think.</p>

<p>Hedvig undressed slowly and carefully. She still felt
her nerves trembling. For a moment she stood naked
before the big mirror built into the wall. Her body was
wonderfully well preserved. In its pale, even whiteness,
its slim roundness, it seemed to her wonderfully young,
immensely younger than she herself. And still it made her
shudder. It might betray her to love, at any moment it
might betray her to love.... And some day it would
relentlessly deliver her to death. Yes, Hedvig belonged to
those in whom nakedness always awakens thoughts of death.
If she had lived some hundred years earlier her fear would
have driven her to self-torture. Then she would have
scourged and martyred her body in order to blunt the point
of death.</p>

<p>She quickly drew the blinds and crept beneath the bedcover.
She slept in Percy’s old bedroom, that solemn
debauch in the architecture of the ’nineties which had once
aroused her frightened amusement when she came there
as a nurse. The bed still resembled a gigantic catafalque,
in the vault of the alcove, the zodiacal signs gleamed and
in the twilight on the opposite wall the blood dripped from
Saint Sebastian’s naked sides....</p>

<p>Hedvig knew that she had a long sleepless night in front
of her. With her eyes half-closed and her hands stretched
by her sides, she went slowly and carefully through all
that had passed between her and Levy. In the silence she
weighed his gestures, his looks, his tones and his actions.
There was something in them that she revelled in, slowly
sipping, drop by drop, like a frightened drinker. It was
a lonely, selfish joy, separated from the world by walls of
darkness and silence.</p>

<p>But by and by she grew more restless, sighed, and turned
over beneath the bedclothes. She felt that she was
approaching a thought that always recurred with terrible
regularity during her nightly meditations. Levy was her
lawyer? Why did he not charge her anything? She had
asked once long ago what she owed for the winding-up, but
she had received an evasive answer. Since then they had
not discussed that point. Did he not want to accept anything?
He might have asked for a very large sum. She
could not help enjoying the thought of having perhaps
escaped it. But then came the frightened after-thought:
Why does he not want anything? Of course because it
imposes an obligation, because he wants you to become
his. He may ask you to be his wife any day.</p>

<p>Levy was no longer a harmless, gently stimulating,
caressing shadow. He stood there by the side of her bed
terribly alive and with pale face and harsh, passionate
voice, hotly demanding his rights. And behind him roared
the whole traffic of the vast opening world. She had to
answer yes or no. She knew she could not escape that
moment. Yes or no. Torn between jubilation and agony
she writhed in the darkness. She could not quite set aside
her passion. Her egoism trembled to the very roots. She
dreamt frightened dreams of being permitted at last
to bare herself, give herself up, be freed from herself,
to fling all her misery into the flames of love.</p>

<p>But in the midst of her excitement she suddenly became
cold as ice. Horribly clear a voice sounded inside her:
“Supposing he only wants your money!”</p>

<p>Then suspicion, and anxious greed rushed over her with
a thousand reasons. She tormented herself systematically
with her sister’s and brothers’ shrugs of shoulders, sarcasms
and covert warnings. Levy’s sharpness, his genius for
business, his legal acumen, all that she had profited by in
him seemed now to bear witness against him. “Yes, it is
my money he wants,” she mumbled, “of course it is my
money.” And now she forgot his looks, his accents and
the unsteadiness of his voice. And the memory of her own
white body in the mirror could no longer warm her with a
single spark of self-confidence. No, it is my money he
wants. And perhaps he does not even mean to marry me
to get it. Perhaps he will simply use his position to cheat
me, trick me, and rob me. He must have seen that I don’t
understand business. Perhaps he is just now planning
how he can take all I have from me, and ruin me.</p>

<p>So Hedvig passed hours of grinding agony, till, calmed
by the morning light, she fell into a short sleep.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>A few days later she stood again at the telephone, ringing
up Levy. Now it was a question of some timber shares
that she had bought on his advice and that had gone down
a few crowns.</p>

<p>On the fifteenth of June Selambs Ltd. had its annual
meeting. That was the last permitted day according to the
articles of association. Peter could never make himself
pay any dividend a single day before he must.</p>

<p>The meeting was, as usual, held in the office at Selambshof.
Hedvig came early so that the others should not be
able to meet and talk about her. For weeks she had
worried over this meeting, at which Levy would again meet
her sister and brothers. A few years ago—on Laura’s and
Stellan’s recommendation—he had been allowed to buy a
few shares, and had been elected to the board, chiefly in order
to keep an eye on the managing director.</p>

<p>Peter was extremely obliging. He stalked about arranging
shares and distributing writing blocks and pencils. He
always looked frightened nowadays at these meetings, and
today more so than usual.</p>

<p>Levy came late, in a hurry, with his coat buttoned, as
impersonal as a chapter of a law book. He bowed stiffly
and sat down at once in his usual place; the chairman’s
place at the writing desk.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Peter, “shall we elect a chairman for the
annual meeting. Is anybody proposed?”</p>

<p>Laura played with the chain of her little gilt handbag.
She was dressed in black and white stripes and had a very
tight skirt. It was in that year that skirts began to be
worn tight. She still had her golden hair and her smooth
skin. And all the same you could clearly see that she
had aged. Her voice sounded cold, the playful purring
had gone.</p>

<p>“I beg to propose Stellan,” she said.</p>

<p>Hedvig was huddled up in her corner, staring at Levy.
“Now he will look at me, now he thinks I shall say something,”
she thought and grew cold all over her body. But
Levy did not. Perhaps he grew a shade paler, but he
looked at Laura with an amused little smile. Then he
calmly put away his papers.</p>

<p>“I beg to second the last honourable speaker,” he said.
“The more so as I have things to say which do not come
well from the Chair.”</p>

<p>Peter’s voice sounded like that of a ventriloquist:</p>

<p>“Is the meeting agreed on this?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Levy in a loud voice. Then he left his place
and demonstratively went and sat down beside Laura on the
sofa, where he took up a foreign newspaper and began to
study the quotations.</p>

<p>So Stellan was chairman. He seemed to take up the
hammer without any enthusiasm and now and then cast
embarrassed side-glances at his predecessor. They then
proceeded to the adjustment of votes. When they came to
Tord Selamb, one hundred shares, absent, Levy pricked
up his ears:</p>

<p>“Mr. Chairman,” he said, in an indifferent tone, “this is
now the third year that Mr. Tord Selamb neither appears in
person nor sends a proxy. Is that not strange?”</p>

<p>Stellan looked inquiringly at Peter:</p>

<p>“I suppose the meeting has been properly convened?
He has been called?”</p>

<p>Peter searched his papers:</p>

<p>“Tord does not care a damn for old Selambshof,” he
muttered in a reproachful tone. “He does not care a
damn for anything....”</p>

<p>“Supposing the reason is that he has sold his shares,”
said Levy without looking up from his paper.</p>

<p>Now it was Stellan’s and Laura’s turn to prick up their
ears:</p>

<p>“Sold? To whom should he have sold them?”</p>

<p>Both looked threateningly at Peter.</p>

<p>Levy continued:</p>

<p>“We can safely strike Mr. Tord Selamb off the list of
voters. Because I happen to <i>know</i> that for three years
he has not possessed a single share.”</p>

<p>“How do you know that?”</p>

<p>“That’s very simple. I wrote and asked him.”</p>

<p>“But Tord does not answer letters.”</p>

<p>“No, not the first. But perhaps the third if it makes
him really furious. In the end I got the answer wrapped
up in a parcel of abuse. He has sold his shares.”</p>

<p>Stellan rose and stared at the managing director of the
company:</p>

<p>“Peter, have you cheated him out of his shares?”</p>

<p>Peter resembled a bear which has been smoked out of
his den. He growled nervously and beat about him with
half paralysed paws.</p>

<p>“Hm, well, damn it all, what was I to do.... He
begged me to help him....”</p>

<p>Laura rose purple with anger:</p>

<p>“You are a wretched scoundrel,” she cried, “a wretched
scoundrel! For three years you have cheated us!”</p>

<p>Stellan fidgeted at his sister’s vulgar expression:</p>

<p>“Please tell us immediately what you paid Tord,” he
said stiffly. “Otherwise I will adjourn the meeting and go
out myself to Järnö to find out.”</p>

<p>Peter stood there rocking and shuffling his feet. His
eyes grew smaller and smaller in his head:</p>

<p>“Well, seventy-five thousand,” he mumbled with a grin
that was now rather pleased than embarrassed.</p>

<p>Laura seemed on the point of flying at him:</p>

<p>“Seventy-five thousand! What a pretty business. We
can understand you wanted to keep it to yourself!”</p>

<p>Stellan looked as if he had bitten into a very sour apple.
He was apparently exercising his art of formulating things:</p>

<p>“It will be our common duty to take care of Tord when
he has finally ruined himself,” he said. “Thus it is only
reasonable that his shares should be distributed equally
among us.”</p>

<p>“Never!” said Peter, “never! never!!”</p>

<p>But Stellan was cold as the grave:</p>

<p>“In that case you cannot count on being re-elected.
There is only one way in which to regain our confidence.”</p>

<p>“Yes, you will be instantly kicked out if you don’t share
alike,” assured Laura. “We will make Stellan director
instead.”</p>

<p>Peter growled, beat about, threatened, whined, but in
the end he had to say good-bye to his fine little stroke of
family business:</p>

<p>“But it went off all right for three years,” he mumbled
with a melancholy grin. “Twenty-five shares per head
at seven hundred and fifty each. It is little short of a
godsend.”</p>

<p>After this quarrel in the orthodox Selambian fashion
they resumed their seats and proceeded with smoothed foreheads
and clear eyes with the agenda.</p>

<p>Hedvig had been sitting silent the whole time staring
at Levy. She thought of the strong family feeling of the
Jews, and their racial <i>esprit de corps</i>. She searched nervously
for a look of disgust and contempt in his face. The
whole meeting occasioned her a new and mysterious torment.
The harshness of their cold voices jarred on her.
She felt strangely weak and moved. She had suffered and
struggled during those last weeks and now she was tired,
tired. She wanted to stand up and propose that they should
give poor Tord what the shares were worth. The words
burnt her tongue. Never before had Hedvig been so near
the mellow and fragrant shores of life. If only Levy had
reacted, if only she could have seen the proper pained
expression on his face. But she could only discover a
half-amused and half-contemptuous curiosity behind his
oriental mask. And so she never rose up from her chair.
And so the words remained unsaid. And so she believed
that he was cold and hard like the others....</p>

<p>And yet Levy had fought like a lion just for her sake.
He had disclosed what he knew only in order to disarm
Stellan and Laura, whose opposition and ill-will he had
foreseen. There is no time to sit and turn up your nose
when you are fighting for the object of your passion. And
must he not be pleased when he saw the magnificent effect
of his information? I have made myself indispensable,
he thought. Now they can’t have the impudence to turn
me out....</p>

<p>But Levy had reckoned without his host.</p>

<p>Without any further quarrels they had gone through the
annual report and accounts, agreed the balance sheet, approved
the action of the directors, settled the dividend and
had now come to the election of the new board. Stellan’s
fingers travelled thoughtfully along the edge of an inky
paperknife. He seemed to want to sit on only half of the
old, worn, dirty office chair:</p>

<p>“May I ask the meeting to propose new members of the
Board?”</p>

<p>There was another silence. The room smelt of dust,
pipe-smoke, dry paper and old sun-dried leather. The
shadows of the elm branches in the garden moved sleepily
across the knots in the worn floor-boards. Then Laura’s
voice sounded again, clear, dry and cold:</p>

<p>“I beg to propose Peter and Stellan and then—Mr.
Sundelius.”</p>

<p>Sundelius was the Manager of a rival firm of Levy’s,
with whom he was moreover engaged in a lawsuit. Nothing
could be more outspoken. Levy took a long puff at his
cigarette:</p>

<p>“Excuse me, but has Sundelius any shares in the company?”
he mumbled.</p>

<p>Laura smiled an exquisite little smile and played with
her suede shoe beneath her striped silk skirt:</p>

<p>“Yes, I have sold a couple to him.”</p>

<p>Then Stellan’s voice sounded, far away and impersonal:</p>

<p>“Has anyone anybody else to propose?”</p>

<p>Levy suddenly looked at Hedvig. Yes, now he looked
at her inquiringly, exactingly, severely. It seemed as if
his black pupils would draw her out of her silent corner.
He made a gesture. It was something indescribable, something
between a shrug of the shoulders and a passionate,
supplicating seizing of a receding cloak, the gesture with
which one appeals to a hardened miser in a bazaar in the
East. Did she not see how they were playing with him,
sneering at him, wanting to kick him out? Had he helped
her or had he not? Were they friends or not? Did he
love her or not? Were they to marry or not?</p>

<p>Hedvig sat there fingering her pencil. Her face was
white. She shivered for cold. What was it Levy asked of
her? Yes, only that she should propose the re-election of
the present board. She must do it at once or it would
be too late. But why did she not say what she had to
say? Why could she not move her tongue? Why was she
so afraid of her own voice?</p>

<p>Hedvig’s glance left Levy and roamed about the room.
Ugh! how many eyes about her—how horribly many!
There sat Stellan pretending to look at his nails, there
Peter sat staring and sulking, there Laura eyed her with
cold scorn. And they all waited for her confession. Go
on, admit now that you are in love with Levy! Call out
to anybody who cares to listen that you are in love with
Levy.</p>

<p>Hedvig sat there as if paralysed, incapable of moving
either hand or tongue.</p>

<p>She was silent—and condemned herself to silence for
all her life.</p>

<p>Then Stellan’s voice sounded with cruel, calculated
hardness:</p>

<p>“May we consider the nominations closed?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Laura.</p>

<p>“Does the Meeting elect the candidates proposed, Peter
Selamb, Stellan Selamb and Mr. P. Sundelius?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Laura in a loud voice.</p>

<p>The hammer fell.</p>

<p>Levy rose. He was perhaps paler than before. Nobody
could see whether his hands trembled, for he had put them
in his trouser pockets. His voice sounded steady:</p>

<p>“Well, then I have nothing more to do here. The fee
due to me as a member of the board you will perhaps allow
me to forego for the benefit of your brother, Mr. Tord
Selamb, whose circumstances I consider deserving compassion.”</p>

<p>And with that Levy left the annual meeting of shareholders
in Selambs Ltd.</p>

<p>All eyes turned maliciously towards Hedvig’s corner.
They forgot Levy’s sarcasm to enjoy their triumph.</p>

<p>“Ugh! how nice to be rid of the Jew,” laughed Laura.
“It was really wise of you Hedvig not to persist in clinging
to that knave of spades.”</p>

<p>“He is really an impossible person,” said Stellan. “His
father came to Sweden on foot with a bundle on his back.”</p>

<p>Peter wanted to add his straw to the heap too, though
he did it in a somewhat strange way:</p>

<p>“If I had followed that scoundrel’s advice I should still
have had Tord’s shares,” he muttered. “He advised me
to transfer the shares in his name, then we two and Hedvig
would have been able to outvote you. But I thought it
was too devilish.”</p>

<p>This was a lie, a clumsy lie. Hedvig knew it and still
she remained silent and allowed her mind to be poisoned.
Yes, she sat there with a face that shrank in pale, shivering
misery and allowed them to thrust the sting into her love.
Their cold malicious joy even gave her a sort of miserable
relief. It soothed her wound. At last she managed to
rise and go out. At the door she suddenly turned round:</p>

<p>“I don’t know why you make such a fuss about Levy,”
she mumbled. “I think he is useful to run errands.”</p>

<p>In the car Hedvig sat and repeated these words to herself
as if she had been afraid of losing them. She got
out in town and walked about for hours in the streets.
She would have turned to a statue of ice if anyone had
whispered to her that she did so in the secret hope of
meeting Levy. But when she came home she kept near the
telephone the whole evening. “If he rings up now and reproaches
me,” she thought, “how shall I make him understand
that it is quite hopeless to expect anything of me.”
It was late when, with a sigh Hedvig tore herself away
from the telephone. Then she lay on her bed in the cool
green half light of the summer night. “Tomorrow he will
come of course,” she thought. “He will be pale, bitter, sarcastic.
He stops in front of me without stretching out his
hand. ‘What do you mean? Have I deserved this treatment?
Are you so ungrateful and hard? Or do you
mistrust me? Have they told you I want your money?
But that is a lie, you know it is! I love you Hedvig! I
can’t live without you! You must be my wife.’”</p>

<p>Hedvig lay quite still and felt the blood burning in
her veins as in a fever after an ague. “Yes, then I must
tell him—that I can <i>never</i> be his wife,” she thought. But
it was a strange trembling “<i>never</i>.” She longed with every
fibre of her being to hear those reproaches, that prayer
which she thought to refuse.</p>

<p>It was not Levy who came the following day but a
letter from the firm of solicitors Levy &amp; Östring, containing
a bill for thirty-five thousand crowns for winding-up costs
and various other commissions.</p>

<p>Poor Levy. There was a sort of helplessness in this
revenge. His thoughts were cast almost exclusively in
terms of money. He could not grow furious without figures
buzzing in his ears. That’s why his wounded pride
and aching love found expression in a heavy bill of costs.
Yes, for he had really loved Hedvig with a passion that
was not less because it was embittered and clear-sighted.</p>

<p>Levy’s revenge had much more effect than he had suspected.
He had as a matter of fact sent Hedvig a bull
of excommunication that was to part her completely from
life and mankind.</p>

<p>“There!” was her first thought, “he did want to plunder
me. He wanted my money and nothing else.” And she
felt confirmed in all her old morbid suspicions. There
were only cheats and crooks in the whole world and Levy
was one of the worst of them.</p>

<p>But at the same time the last shreds of the veil of charity
were torn from her feelings. She knew now that she had
loved him; that she still loved him in spite of all; that
she would never be rid of an aching pain in her heart.</p>

<p>That was the climax of a mute and humiliating drama
in which love fought a hopeless fight against mean fear.
Hedvig remained with her poor gold.</p>

<p>Yes, she clung convulsively to the money for which she
had sacrificed all. She could not transact any new business
herself but, strange to say, and in spite of her distrust,
she allowed all Levy’s investments stand. But she
collected her papers, pondered and calculated. Down in
the vaults of the bank and at home in her villa she sat
and counted and counted. Like the hermit with his rosary
she sat mumbling, letting one figure after the other slip
between her fingers.</p>

<p>Levy’s letter accompanying the bill she did not answer.
Perhaps it was her timid unwillingness to reveal anything.
Perhaps it was a secret hope that he would call himself.</p>

<p>In the end Mr. Levy had to take proceedings to get his
money.</p>

<p>Hedvig no longer drove out to Percy’s grave. The
shadow game was over. She no longer needed the dead to
protect her against the living. And though she now more
and more rarely went outside the house she no longer
glanced at Percy’s collections. It was really a strange
whim of fate that just such a being as she should steal
about in that big house, built as a home of Art.</p>

<hr class="c010" />

<p>On a sultry and still summer evening Hedvig rose with
smarting eyes and throbbing temples from her papers in
the bedroom. She had an idea that people stared at her
down at the bank and she had therefore brought everything
home: shares, mortgages, title deeds, deposit receipts,
bank-books and bundles of notes. And now it was difficult
in the evenings because she did not dare to light the
light from fear of being seen from the outside through the
chinks in the blinds. She sat over her papers till the figures
swam together in a grey mist and there was a pricking
sensation in her eyes. Then she crept to the door to see
that the towel was hanging over the keyhole, so that none
of the servants should peep in. Then she stole slowly,
stopping all the time to listen, towards the big built-in
wardrobe where she had found a good hiding place behind
an old carved chest. When her treasure was hidden, she
noiselessly opened a window and looked out to see if anybody
moved.</p>

<p>Hedvig stood long in the window. The evening was
sultry and heavy. Far below the firs lay a woolly darkness.
Above, a few faint scattered stars hung in a sky
to which the reflections of the neighbouring town imparted
a reddish, ominous hue. Against this background she
presently distinguished the quick shadowy flight of the bats
round the eaves, the soft flutter of the moths, the flight of
the spiders with their long helplessly suspended legs, all
the mysterious fluttering and hovering things out in the
big witches’-kitchen of the damp, warm summer night.</p>

<p>Hedvig felt a fever round her temples, a dull anxiety.
All her silent, secret, suppressed feelings revived for the
last time and moved about in the darkness. It was the
restlessness of the body in the presence of the relentless
oncoming autumn that melted together with her dim light-shy
anxiety for her treasure.</p>

<p>Hedvig closed the window, pulled down the blind, turned
on the light, and began to undress. She moved slowly,
hesitatingly, sighing. At first she turned her back to the
mirror, but by and by she stole one glance after the other
into it. She was irresistibly drawn to the corner where
the mirror stood. It seemed that the air there was not
so still and burdened with loneliness. Before the mirror
her movements quickened. With her glance fastened intently
on her own image Hedvig loosened her hair and
let her last garment fall to the floor. She had aged quickly
of late, had grown grey about the temples and had folds
beneath her breasts. And now she suddenly screwed up
her face, so that it was full of wrinkles, and emphasised
the weariness of her pose. “I am old,” she mumbled,
“I am old.” And it seemed as if she had huddled up
under the lee of old age.</p>

<p>But Hedvig did not escape so easily. She did not deceive
herself. With a jerk she straightened herself up again,
threw back her head, lifted her arms behind her neck so
that her breasts seemed more beautiful. And she felt how
a smile spread and opened out on her face. She saw it
in the mirror, a strange, girlish trembling smile with pouting
mouth, ready to be kissed and bitten. She began to
turn and sway to and fro as if she heard dance-music.
Closer and closer her face approached the mirror. She
felt a faint sickness as if in a swing, and the air felt hot
round her temples. Beside her own nakedness she beheld
in the unnatural gloom of the mirror-room the nakedness
of St. Sebastian. The ropes cut into his beautiful limbs.
The points of the arrows were softly embedded in the even,
slightly bronzed flesh.... To Hedvig he suddenly assumed
Levy’s face. Yes, it was Levy’s mouth which smiled
at her. His lips had lost their scorn and smiled close to
hers, ecstatically, sensually. His eyes had lost their sharp,
short-sighted stare and revealed black, fathomless depths
of life and passion. His scorching breath rushed over her,
his arms bent her irresistibly....</p>

<p>Hedvig collapsed. Moaning and sobbing she rolled on
the carpet whilst the last late attenuated rush of blood
painfully fought its way through her bosom....</p>

<p>Suddenly she started as if somebody had poured cold
water over her. She seemed to hear footsteps and whispers
outside. She flew to the switch, turned out the light and
listened again intently. Then she quickly put on some
clothes and lifted the blind carefully. Trembling in her
whole body she lay there crouching and watched. At first
she saw only the black darkness, but by and by she distinguished
two figures, one dark and one light, down by
the fence. They stood in the shadow of the firs tightly
clasped together.</p>

<p>It was the chauffeur and the parlourmaid.</p>

<p>Hedvig was at once overcome by confused emotions of
shame, indignation and furious suspicions. The impudent,
shameless, immoral rabble! Before my eyes! Of course
they were spying through the chinks in the blinds. And
now they are laughing at me between their kisses. Yes, I
have seen them often exchange glances of secret understanding.
Fancy if they have seen me with the papers
too. Fancy if they are conspiring to rob me. If they
murder me one night and take everything and set fire to
the house to hide their crime....</p>

<p>Hedvig remained on her aching knees till the couple
had passed through the gate and disappeared in the darkness
of the forest. Then she dragged herself to bed and
lay there listening with every nerve in the thick darkness.
All the time she imagined she heard something move in
the wardrobe. In the end she had to get up and bring the
papers and the money into her bed. With her arm round
the two heavy leather portfolios she at last fell into a
restless slumber.</p>

<p>The following morning Hedvig dismissed the chauffeur
and the parlourmaid. That was the beginning to the depopulation
of Hill villa. Then she sold the car and had a
fire and burglar proof safe built into the wall in the wardrobe.
When it began to grow cold in the autumn she closed
up the picture galleries and only heated a few rooms. By
that time both the cook and the other maid and the gardener
had gone. She had only one servant left, an old
bad-tempered, silent, faithful servant of the Hill family.</p>

<p>The snow came and Hedvig got herself up at dawn, so
as not to be seen, and swept the snow drifts from the gate.
For long periods only one thin column of smoke rose
from the chimneys to show that there was still flickering
life in the big white villa. It gradually began to become
a ghost-house.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">VIII<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">TORD SAILS OUT TO SEA</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">With its knife-sharp stem the big motor boat cut
straight through the September storm. In the
stern Stellan and Laura were lying, well protected
from both draught and spray by canvas and bevelled glass
screens. The splash of the waves mingled with the sound
of jingling mirrors and trays in the elegant saloon.</p>

<p>“The motor runs nicely today,” observed Laura.</p>

<p>“It always runs well when you are on your way to something
disagreeable,” mumbled Stellan.</p>

<p>“Do you think there is more vibration in the bows?”</p>

<p>“Of course there is nearer the motor. Why do you ask?”</p>

<p>“The vibration is nearly as good as massage. I have
not had any for a whole week. It’s perfectly awful. I
think I will move up there.”</p>

<p>Laura stepped up to the bows. Her life was now characterised
by an incessant struggle against incipient corpulency.
She took massage, had gymnastics, played games
and rode. The fear of getting old forced her out of her
feline laziness. She positively dared not sit still. “If
I rest or if I lie on my back, then old age will come over
me,” she thought. This new restlessness went hand in hand
with an ardent desire to be in at everything, not to miss
anything. She had fallen a helpless victim to the disease
of seeing and being seen. Dances, first nights, private
views, bazaars, matches:—everywhere you saw Countess
von Borgk. And everywhere you saw her flirt with young
men, preferably very young men.</p>

<p>It had not been exactly an agreeable surprise for Stellan
to discover her at the great autumn shooting party at
Granö. Stellan was no longer fond of female company.
His wife he fortunately escaped. She was always at the
seaside or at some sanatorium, but Laura he often met.
But with the old bachelor Major von Brauner he had
thought he would be free from her. Certainly Brauner
had figured at Laura’s gambling evenings out in the Narvavägen,
but Stellan did not know that relations had continued.
Judge of his annoyance, then, when he turned in
his motor boat and saw his pretty sister on the pier; Laura
in short skirts, with puttees on her legs and a young painter
fool carrying her gun.</p>

<p>And at dinner she came down, the only lady amongst
so many men, half naked, wrapped in some green silk stuff
that really cried aloud of her lost youth. And she herself
gave the signal for the naughty stories after dinner. Grotesque!</p>

<p>As if that were not unpleasant enough they began to
talk about the neighbouring Järnö. And who should start
that topic but Laura. She was half lying in her chair
and told lots of stories about dear old Tord. There was
a moment of painful silence, but as the family itself did
not seem to mind ... well, then they let their tongues
wag. Nobody mentioned such a trifle as that Tord had the
Governor of the province at him all the time for neglect.
That was to be seen in any paper. But now he had put
up big notices:</p>
<p class="c016">“Landing forbidden on penalty of death.</p>
<p class="c017">Tord of Järnö.”</p>
<p class="c003">And he actually did shoot at people who entered his
waters. Von Brauner himself had once sought shelter there
during a thunderstorm and had heard the bullets whizz
about his ears. The people round about were so furious
that an accident might happen at any moment.</p>

<p>“A philosopher who has read too much Darwin and
Nietzsche,” mumbled Stellan. “He wants to be a living
protest against the more sentimental theories.”</p>

<p>Stellan tried to save the situation by being objective at
the same time as he appealed to the sportman’s individualism
and the aristocratic prejudices of the company.</p>

<p>But Laura laughed:</p>

<p>“Nonsense, he is just mad. But anyhow, madmen may
be rather jolly.”</p>

<p>The following day Stellan left Gränö in order to go to
Järnö and talk to Tord. It was not so easy to get Laura
to come with him, because she felt very much at home
amongst the shooting party. But now they were on their
way anyhow. The motor boat already began to plunge in
the rougher and heavier seas of the big Järnö bay.</p>

<p>Stellan put on an old oilskin and went up on the captain’s
bridge:</p>

<p>“Are you quite sure of the chart?” he asked the man at
the wheel.</p>

<p>“Yes, sir, I was born in this neighbourhood.”</p>

<p>Between the seas Stellan took the opportunity of looking
down into the engine room. Because he had his suspicions
of Laura’s vibration. The mechanic, who was a handsome
dark youth, might also have something to do with it.</p>

<p>Stellan was an old gambler, who was very frightened of
leaving anything to chance.</p>

<p>The rocking of the boat soon made Laura leave the
fumes from the engine room and quietly creep into the
saloon.</p>

<p>They were approaching Järnö. Tall and foreboding
rose the dark, rusty-looking hill surmounted by its log
castle. The boat steered straight for the entrance to the
harbour.</p>

<p>Was the madman really going to shoot? Not even
through his Feiss-glasses could Stellan distinguish any
sign of life.</p>

<p>Bang! A shot rang out above the lapping of the waves
but nobody saw where it went.</p>

<p>“One ought to come here in warships,” the man mumbled.</p>

<p>Stellan slowed down. They slipped under the lee of
the hill beside a dilapidated old shed.</p>

<p>Another shot of welcome! This time the shot struck
only a few yards to starboard. But it was impossible
to discover who had fired it.</p>

<p>Laura cried out that she wanted to go back. Stellan
looked as if he felt sick. He waved a handkerchief eagerly
as a flag of truce. There were no more shots. The boat
floated quietly in towards a tumbledown fishing pier. But
still no living soul was visible.</p>

<p>Stellan had some trouble in getting Laura out of the
saloon. Not that he had any illusions about Tord’s chivalry,
but he felt safer all the same when he had her with
him. Silent and hesitating they went ashore, still with
the reports of the shots on their nerves. They passed
through an old field which was now running wild and full
of little shoots of birches and aspens, then they cut across
a little garden quite overgrown with pestilence weed out
of which a few half suffocated black currant bushes
stretched up their arms like drowning people, whilst the
poor naked apple trees writhed in grey despair in front of
a rotting cottage wall with broken windows and grass-grown
porch. Nature crept in over the work of man and began
to resume its power. Over the whole there lay, in the
gloomy autumn day, an indescribable odour of dampness,
decay and dismal neglect.</p>

<p>Shivering, Laura and Stellan took the path up the hill.
Up there, whipped by the winds, the big house lay with
its weathered logs, surrounded by a litter of empty tins
and broken bottles.</p>

<p>Nobody came out when Stellan knocked. The door was
not locked and they walked in. The big hall was cold,
dirty and filled with a strange smell of animals. The
whole house shook in the gale, and on the windows towards
the north a pine branch knocked persistently as if the
wind wished to enter as a guest.</p>

<p>They cautiously penetrated further. On one of the folding
beds in the bedroom something lay huddled up under
a reindeer skin. It moved when Laura lifted the fur rug
and an untidy head peeped out. It was Dagmar. She
stared in dull amazement at the visitors, without recognizing
them.</p>

<p>“I am Laura ... Laura Selamb ... and this is Stellan.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I see, it’s you....”</p>

<p>Dagmar crept down. She was dressed in some grey
rags. She had the grey complexion of the really poor,
she looked emaciated, worn out. She gave at the same
time the horrible and pitiful impression of a starved and
tormented woman. She shook herself, and her teeth chattered:</p>

<p>“I am lying down as I am not quite well.”</p>

<p>“We wanted to speak to Tord,” said Stellan. “Where
is he?”</p>

<p>Dagmar’s face hardened:</p>

<p>“I don’t know at all.”</p>

<p>“He greeted us with his gun, so he must be in the
neighbourhood.”</p>

<p>“I suppose he ran away when he recognized you. He
is not very fond of visitors.”</p>

<p>Then Dagmar suddenly approached Laura and stroked
the smooth sleeve of her raincoat timidly, like a frightened
dog:</p>

<p>“Goodness, how pretty you are! Do you know I have
not talked to a woman for several years.”</p>

<p>Laura shrugged her shoulders and giggled:</p>

<p>“Well, that is nothing to long for.”</p>

<p>An expression of terror suddenly came over Dagmar’s
face.</p>

<p>“You must be hungry,” she mumbled. “And I have
only got a little salted herring.”</p>

<p>Stellan went out and blew three short sharp signals on
a whistle. Then he returned.</p>

<p>“Don’t trouble about food,” he said. “My men will
bring up all we need. But how shall we get hold of
Tord?”</p>

<p>“Oh, he has not eaten anything today, and when he is
hungry he will come and feed out of your hand.”</p>

<p>The men soon arrived carrying up boxes of food and
wine. Dagmar excused herself for a moment and dived
into a wardrobe to make herself smart.... She returned
dressed in an old-fashioned, frayed red silk frock which
hung round her thin body. But there still glimmered a
last spark of beauty in her features.</p>

<p>When dinner was over she went out into the porch and
hammered a broken zinc tub with a poker and shouted into
the forest:</p>

<p>“Food, food, food!”</p>

<p>It sounded like the cry of an angry bird through the
roaring of the wind.</p>

<p>Tord did not come.</p>

<p>“Well, then we can eat without the beast,” said Dagmar.</p>

<p>Her eyes suddenly grew wet as she sank down by the
dazzlingly white tablecloth. Such a lot of lovely food—so
many fine bottles! And then there was the man with
“Rapid” in white letters across his jersey, just like a footman
behind her chair! And then Laura’s jewels and Stellan’s
yachting suit!</p>

<p>“Goodness me,” she mumbled. “Goodness me!”</p>

<p>And then she drank her first cocktail.</p>

<p>Stellan pointed to Tord’s empty chair:</p>

<p>“How has our amiable host got into the habit of shooting
at people who call on him?”</p>

<p>Dagmar quickly drank her second cocktail. A wild
smile lit up her face like lightning:</p>

<p>“He is afraid they will come and take me from him....
So you can see he is mad.”</p>

<p>They ate for a moment in silence. The firelight from
the logs in the fireplace flickered over the faces in the
big dark hall, which was still shaken by the gale, and
where the pine branch still persistently knocked at the
window:</p>

<p>Knock, knock, knock...!</p>

<p>Dagmar drank and drank—with trembling hands and
staring eyes. Suddenly she flung herself forward with her
hands stretched across the table and her forehead on the
cloth. She was seized by a paroxysm of weeping:</p>

<p>“It is terrible here!” she mumbled, “it is terrible here!
I shall never be a human being again, never!”</p>

<p>She again lifted her face, distorted and dirty from her
tears. She shook her clenched fists and by fits and starts
there broke from her a wild and disconnected wailing over
the drudgery, the loneliness, the hatred, the savagery of life
out here on the stormbeaten cliff’s.</p>

<p>“He is mad!” she cried. “Tord is mad! He can’t bear
to see people. He hides his money under trees. If I had
not stolen from him, we should have starved to death!”</p>

<p>At the mention of money Laura pricked up her ears and
across Stellan’s rigid mask a glimpse of a melancholy grin
appeared. There was thus at least something comprehensible
in this misery.</p>

<p>“What happened to the money?” he mumbled.</p>

<p>Stellan was told. Dagmar’s tears dried suddenly. She
spluttered out fragments of the long, bitter monologues of
years. Into her voice there entered the shrill accents of
old quarrels. Peter had brought the money. And it was
an enormous bundle of notes. But Tord did not put them
into the bank. No, he pushed them all into a drawer, so
mad was he. And he carried the key on a string round his
neck. And he was mean with the money so that he need
not go into town and talk business any more. He wanted
to be free from that mob, he said. The money must last
as long as he lived. And that was why they went half
starved, and dressed in old rags. In the end Tord got it
into his head that they did not need any food from the
shops, but could live by shooting and fishing. It was no
use begging or talking, for then he simply went away. Once
he lay out in the skerries for a whole fortnight and then
Dagmar had only some plaice to live on. But when Tord
came home she saw no other way out than to make him
drunk with his last bottle, and then she took the key and
stole some of his money and sent the old gardener into
town for winter supplies. For the old gardener was still
alive then.</p>

<p>Tord said nothing when the old man came sailing back
with his load of provisions. He was so hungry that he
just threw himself over the food.</p>

<p>So things went on for a long time. Dagmar had learnt
to open the drawer with a hairpin, and she had to watch
for an opportunity to send the old man out when Tord was
drunk or asleep. It seemed almost as if he acquiesced
in the arrangement so long as he need not give out the
money himself. But one day Dagmar found the drawer
empty. All the notes were gone. She became dreadfully
frightened. She began to spy on Tord to discover
where he had hidden his money. And he was on his
guard to see if she were following him. And thus they
stole about silently and spied on each other like two
criminals. And at last she managed to discover where
he kept his treasure. It was in a hole underneath a tree
root behind Mattson’s barn. She took a whole bundle of
notes and hid them for herself. Tord noticed that the
pile had suddenly diminished and he came home white
with fury and threatened to kill her. But she defied him
and would not tell her hiding place. And Tord did not
find it.</p>

<p>One fine day the old gardener died. His pipe just fell
out of his mouth and he was dead. Tord wanted to dig
a grave for the old man down there without further ado.
“We can say that he was drowned, if anybody asks,” he
said. Dagmar frightened him by saying that they would
be arrested as murderers if they did not notify the death.
At last she got him to put up the sails of his boat. Dagmar
sat down in the deckhouse and cried. She felt as if
she had lost both father and mother when they sailed into
the cemetery with the old man.</p>

<p>And now she had only herself to fall back on if they
were to keep body and soul together out there at Järnö.
Soon everything was eaten up again and Tord would not
go to the shops. And when she herself was going to set
out in the skiff he had hidden the oars. She became
so desperate that she sat down alone on the pier and
howled like a wild animal. Then she remembered she
had one more refuge and that was her red blanket. She
had arranged once with the storekeeper that if they were
in distress she was to hang out a big red rug in the window
of the big house. And then he would take the motor
boat and bring food to them. She had not much hope;
she sat for an eternity out on the cliff only staring out over
the water to see if the signal worked. On the third day
a motor boat actually rounded the point and so their distress
was staved off for that time. This had happened last
autumn. The winter was cruel. They had no longer
anybody to carry wood and water. Dagmar became ill
from all the drudgery. For two months they were isolated
when the ice would neither break nor bear. At last the
ice froze properly everywhere except over an under current.</p>

<p>But then the peasants smashed up the yacht which was
lying in the steamer track through the ice, and then it
was impossible to get across as they were too weak to drag
out another boat. People had begun to damage everything
of Tord’s that they could lay hands on, nets, piers,
boats; so hated was he now. And Tord no longer swore
and raged. He only walked about like a dumb animal for
days and weeks together. And about that time the lamp
oil also ran out, so that they had to sit there in the darkness
in the evenings after the logs in the fireplace had
burnt out. So they sat there in the dark and dared not
let each other go and still they couldn’t help nagging.
She was ill, and she wanted to die merely to annoy him.
And he tried to keep quiet until she should go mad.</p>

<p>“Yes, this has been a terribly long winter,” said Dagmar,
“a terribly long winter.”</p>

<p>After which she was quiet for a moment and sat there
rocking her head and staring straight in front of her.</p>

<p>Laura had risen from the table and stood warming
her back at the open fireplace:</p>

<p>“But why, in God’s name, woman, why have you not
left him long ago?” she exclaimed.</p>

<p>Dagmar started. It seemed as if she had been cruelly
torn out of the voluptuous intoxication of at last shouting
out her misery.</p>

<p>“Why didn’t I leave him?” she mumbled; “it must be
because I am mad, because he has infected me, because
I have not spoken to a woman for years. But now there
must be an end. Now I must get away. Fancy, I was
quite young when I came here! Quite young and pretty!
And look what he has made of me now!”</p>

<p>She tore her frock open and showed her thin neck and
shrunken chest.</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s how I am now. I must get away. I must
come with you to town. He says he will shoot me if I
run away—but that doesn’t matter. I can’t live another
winter out here anyhow.”</p>

<p>During Dagmar’s outpourings Stellan had been sitting
motionless sucking an unlighted cigar. Now he exchanged
a quick glance with Laura. Unpleasantness and scandal
threatened from all sides. They must be careful. He
called in the men and ordered them to clear the table and
take the things down to the boat. Then he turned to
Dagmar:</p>

<p>“To take you with us now is absolutely out of the
question,” he said coldly. “But if you can persuade Tord
to go abroad, preferably out of Europe, I am prepared to
give you some money.”</p>

<p>Dagmar had begun to pull out some clothes at random
and put them in a knapsack. She looked up and shook
her head:</p>

<p>“You don’t understand,” she muttered hurriedly. “He
is impossible. It is impossible to talk to him. I must
get away!”</p>

<p>Stellan rose:</p>

<p>“Good-bye,” he said. “Thank you. We must get away
before it grows dark. Think over what I have said.”</p>

<p>Dagmar stamped on the floor:</p>

<p>“No,” she cried. “I must come with you! You can
put me ashore wherever you like. I can very well sleep
in the gutter tonight! But I must get away!”</p>

<p>Laura and Stellan walked quickly out. Dagmar came
after them, without hat, in her red silk frock and with
her bundle in her hand. The gale tore her untidy fair hair.
Mumbling, crying, stumbling, she ran after Laura and
Stellan down the rock hillside.</p>

<p>“If you don’t take me with you, I will throw myself in
the water!”</p>

<p>And so she did. When by Stellan’s orders the man
pulled in the gangway and the boat began to back out she
flung herself in, scorning death, with bundle and silk frock
and all.</p>

<p>The men had to pick her up. Pale, shivering, dripping,
but full of the determination of despair she clung to the
mast on the foredeck. But Stellan steered into the pier
again....</p>

<p>At that moment a grey figure appeared round the corner
of the shed. It was Tord. For hours he had been sitting
there in the smell of herrings, amongst torn nets and
worm-eaten decoy ducks, and staring at an ant’s trail that
began in a hole in a floor board and disappeared between
some stones at the side of the lake. Now he walked half
way out along the tottering dilapidated pier. He was
dressed in a worn fur cap, grey Iceland sweater and torn
Lapp boots. In his hand he held a rifle. His rough
unshaven face was as grey as a lichen, shrunken, and set in
hopeless defiance. For a moment he stood motionless,
staring at Dagmar, who still tremblingly clung to the mast.
The gust of wind ruffled the pools on deck and tore at her
wet ragged skirt. The vibration of the motor set the water
in the whole of the little harbour nervously trembling. It
was as if the water, the boat and the woman were shivering
from the same cold squall.</p>

<p>“I can jump into the water again,” she cried.</p>

<p>Stellan was going to jump ashore, but Tord fingered
his rifle.</p>

<p>“Back,” he shouted. “Let go! You shall not land
at my pier again. To hell with you all!”</p>

<p>Yes, that is what Tord cried out. For years he had
watched over Dagmar like a red Indian, so that she should
not run away. But now he suddenly stood there telling
her to go to hell!</p>

<p>Laura had settled down comfortably on the bridge.
She pulled Stellan’s arm:</p>

<p>“Don’t say anything,” she whispered. “Let us see what
he will do. This is interesting. I have not seen Tord for
many years. He really is interesting.”</p>

<p>But Stellan took no notice of her. He was ashamed
before his men and stepped up to Tord. He stood there
straight and stiff in his yachting suit with the mien of
an officer before a drunken recruit.</p>

<p>“This won’t do,” he said in a low tone. “Damn it,
what a figure you cut! You are completely impossible.
If you will take your wife and go away to South America
I will find the money.”</p>

<p>Tord came face to face with his brother:</p>

<p>“South America? Because you have a badge on your
cap? By your snobbish order? You just get aboard.
Access to this island is forbidden by Tord Selamb!”</p>

<p>Tord planted the muzzle of his rifle in Stellan’s stomach
and forced him, with his fingers on the trigger, to retire
on board. After which he took his curved knife and cut
the moorings.</p>

<p>“Back,” he commanded again, and the man at the wheel
obeyed.</p>

<p>The big red mahogany boat glided quickly out of the
harbour.</p>

<p>Dagmar still clung to the mast and stared shivering at
the lonely grey man out on the pier:</p>

<p>“The key of the larder lies under my pillow,” she called.
And there was suddenly a tremulous note of pity in her
voice at the sight of his terrible loneliness.</p>

<p>Then she crept down in the machine room.</p>

<p>They were already in the open. The gale had increased
and the motor boat rolled and pitched in the high seas in
Järnö bay. Laura got out some dry things for Dagmar.
She looked up with a grimace at Stellan:</p>

<p>“Why the devil had you to go out to Järnö? There was
more fun at Brauner’s!”</p>

<p>Stellan shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p>“It might be as well to have her with us. Tord will
soon follow and then we will deport them.”</p>

<p>Tord did not see the motor boat for a long while from
the pier. It was hidden by a tongue of land. “I won’t
go up the hill,” he thought. “What the deuce have I to do
on the hill?” But soon after he was up there all the same.
The boat was visible far out in the channel. It looked
like a dark spot on the grey waters. Sometimes there
was a flash of light as it dashed through a big sea. It got
smaller and smaller. He had to fasten his gaze upon it
intently if the water was not to appear absolutely deserted.
Then the boat disappeared far, far away beneath a grey
headland.</p>

<p>Tord started. When his hand moved on to the rifle
barrel the steel was so cold that it burnt. Somebody
had drawn a deep, moaning sigh. It must have been himself.</p>

<p>He was alone now. It was ghastly how everything suddenly
grew in the loneliness, how everything grew big
and heavy and terrible, the trees, the clouds, the wind,
the sea.</p>

<p>Quickly, as if pursued by an enemy, he dived into his
house. The fire had gone out. The pine branch still beat
against the window: knock! knock! knock! He went up
to the wall and tried with his hand the draught from a
chink between the logs, then he suddenly rushed out into
the kitchen and swallowed some remains of food. It was
the first food he had tasted that day. A drop of wine was
left in a glass. He poured it into him. Then he spat
it out again feeling nauseated. And then he was in the
bedroom by Dagmar’s bed. The pillow was still pressed
down after her head. He raised his clenched fist for a
blow but suddenly stopped and raised the rifle that he
still trailed with him. The shot went straight into the
pillow so that the feathers whirled about. Afterwards it
became horribly quiet. Tord shivered. Why make a noise
and shoot? There was nobody to hear him, nobody.
Then the pine branch began to beat against the window
again. Knock! knock! No, he could not stay here!</p>

<p>Tord went down to the little reed-grown bay. He half
ran but stopped now and then like a child that stops crying
for a moment to feel its pain. Down there the old yacht
lay riding at anchor. For days and weeks its deckhouse
had been his last refuge when everything else was disgusting
and hateful. The punt lay beneath the alder trees.
Tord got it afloat and rowed out through the scattered, rustling
reeds. On board the yacht the deck was covered with
withered leaves. The water had risen up into the cockpit.
Water is never so unpleasant as when, brown with rust
from the ballast, it rises up in an old boat. Tord pumped.
With difficulty he opened the swollen doors of the cabin.
Down below it smelt of rotting oak, rotten ropes, mildew
and damp. He pushed away a lot of rubbish and lay down
on a cushion. Flap, flap! went the eternal waves as they
splashed against the stem. Rat-tat! the foresail halyard
beat against the mast as the wind swept in. And the alders
and the hill swung to and fro through the little window, to
and fro, to and fro!</p>

<p>The chill rose out of the cold, stinking cushion so that
Tord could no longer lie on it. He climbed up on
deck and began mechanically to hoist sail. The stiff grey
hemp creaked in his hands. Out of the wet, mildewed
folds of the sail crawled swarms of earwigs. The sheets
were full of kinks and doublings. The boom suddenly
knocked him down on the deck, but he rose groaning, pulled
in the shiny, green anchor chain and hauled up the anchor,
which was a mass of mire and mud. Then he sprang to
the helm.</p>

<p>As by magic the yacht found its way out through the
narrow, difficult channel. Now it lay in Järnö bay, under
the lee of the familiar hill. Black, gusty squalls puffed
in all directions over the leaden grey water. At first
the old hull did not seem to know what it wanted to do.
The sails filled, shivered and went over. The main-sheet
struck off Tord’s fur cap. He did not care. He sat huddled
up by the helm looking at a feather that had fastened
on his sleeve. He stared at the soft, white down that
trembled at each puff. The memories of past kisses, caresses
and embraces softly, wonderfully softly, flattered his
soul. There to starboard was the course to town, to the
people, to Dagmar.... He fell away before an easterly
gust; he was already out in the more steady wind of
Järnö bay.... But then the yacht suddenly went about
with whipping sails and headed out towards the open sea
visible through “The Iron Door.” Tord did not know why
he had tacked. It was as if the old boat had known
better than he.</p>

<p>As soon as Tord had rounded the point, the gale cast
itself upon him as if a window had blown in. The yacht
luffed, slowed down with flapping sails and vibrated till
you could feel it through the whole hull. Then it slowly
fell away and gathered speed.</p>

<p>Tord seemed to waken up. Beneath his blown coarse
tufts of hair his glance grew keen again. “By Jove, now
we shall have some sailing!” Muttering sturdy oaths, he
worked himself up for a quarrel, a wild quarrel with his
beloved old sea. It was the last thing he had to fight
with. Everything else had gone.</p>

<p>He was still under the Kall-skerries, and the worst had
not yet begun.</p>

<p>There are gales and gales. This was no puffing, impatient,
spring squall, nor yet a black, summer squall, but
a big heavy, autumn gale with all the grimness of the
coming winter behind it. It came from the north, too.
Sky, water and hills had all the hues of iron. The clouds
hung with shades of darkish blue between the lighter clearings
in the sky. The distant cliffs flashed suddenly with a
ghostlike, dead, metallic sheen.</p>

<p>Now he would soon be out in the open sea. Now it was
time to put about if ever he wanted to get back. But Tord
did not. The sea was stronger than he.</p>

<p>East of Järnö the sea is almost always deserted. There
are no buoys or lighthouses, no sails and no smoke from
steamers. No man stood with glasses to his eyes following
the death struggle of the yacht out in the raging twilight
of the sea.</p>

<p>Tord did not give in so easily. He sailed like an old
sailor. He sat huddled up to windward and spat out
the salt water and avoided the worst breakers. With
a kind of pale and passionate devotion he saw the
seas grow and grow. Every heavy, onrushing, crested
wave out there in the desolate expanse was like a confirmation
of something he had long, long known. Stiff
with cold in his dripping rags, shivering to the very marrow
with weariness, he felt a mysterious inward joy as both
the boat and himself irresistibly succumbed. Then the
peak blew down and the boom trailed in the water. Then
the waves began to crash in through the missing hatch in
the bows. It became more and more difficult for the heavy
half-disabled hull to lift itself out of the troughs. Then
Tord was flung overboard just at the moment when the
boat capsized and sank. He saw the faded red pennant
at the masthead dive a few fathoms away from him.
He still kept afloat, he was still swimming. But he did
not swim towards the land, but further out, towards the
sea. The last thing he saw was a high, wonderfully tall,
mountain of water, iron-grey, ice-green, rising above his
head, with a crest of coldest, palest foam. In the middle
of the wave he sucked the water into his lungs, lost consciousness
and passed without pain.</p>

<p>Thus finished Tord Selamb’s last great wild quarrel.
Defiance you might call it, a wild mad defiance unto death.
A philosopher might perhaps mumble something about
the negative in all egoism. Tord had driven the Selambian
selfishness to the point at which it annihilates itself.</p>
<div class="pbb">
 <hr class="pb c004" />
</div>
<div class="chapter">

  <h2 class="c005">IX<br /> <br /><span class="small"><em class="gesperrt">PETER’S TOMBSTONE</em></span></h2>
</div>
<p class="c003">One cold winter day in the third year of the world war
Laura drove out to Lidingön. Private cars were no
longer permitted, but she had borrowed the big
sledge from Trefvinge.</p>

<p>Laura did not suffer at all from the biting cold, she was
too fat for that. She had given up the struggle and had
thrown herself into the arms of an ever growing appetite.
The nervous interest in food which had arisen during the
great crisis had broken down her last timid resistance.
Yes, now when other people grew thin she grew fat, irrevocably
fat. Her appearance was really rather striking.
In her shining furs she resembled an enormous, hairy
female animal. Her cheeks had folds in them but her
eyes, embedded in fat, were still clear and quick, and the
small mouth was greedy and hard.</p>

<p>Some people simply do not seem made for suffering.</p>

<p>Laura had in good time put on a soft protective layer
of fat between herself and the cruel “fimbul” winter of a
world in which starvation, pain, hatred and death in these
days did their terrible work.</p>

<p>After some searching they found the road that turned
off to Villa Hill. It had not been cleared of snow. There
was not a trace of footsteps or of sledge marks. It was like
driving into the desert. One turn and the house lay there
apparently quite deserted in its big wooded park.</p>

<p>To penetrate to the front door was impossible, the road
was blocked by a giant snowdrift. Laura had to trudge
through the snow to the kitchen door where a few tracks
really met. A bad-tempered old servant peeped suspiciously
out through the half-opened door, but did not want
to remove the safety chain.</p>

<p>“I am Countess von Borgk, your mistress’ sister. I
have an important errand. Open at once, woman.”</p>

<p>Laura passed through a kitchen that frightened her appetite
to a cold shudder and was then brought through
silent, dusky stairs and passages to the hall.</p>

<p>“You can wait here. The mistress is out, but will soon
be back.”</p>

<p>Laura sank down on a chair with a grey cover. She
had not been out to see Hedvig for years. Ugh! how awful
everything looked here, dark, dirty, cold, dilapidated....</p>

<p>Time passed, and Laura grew impatient. She took a
peep at the picture galleries. The door was locked but
she found the key on a shelf.</p>

<p>The poor deserted pictures! Dust, spiders’ webs, damp
spots and dust again. Through dirty window panes, shaded
by overgrown fir hedges and entangled branches of creeper,
through glass roofs covered by the shrivelled leaves of
autumn and the snow of winter a miserable twilight penetrated.
The poor nudes in the pictures shivered in their
bare skin over a long narrow drift that had blown in
through a broken window in the roof. The “<i>plein air</i>”
and impressionistic landscapes were blotted out by the
dust and twilight. The modern brutalities seemed to survive
longest. One or two shrill colour-screams still cut
through the dark, the icy cold, and the silence like a cry
of distress....</p>

<p>Laura huddled up in her furs. This was too dismal.
She felt hungry—a desire to chew something—so it was
always nowadays if she was exposed to any emotion. She
took a packet of tough nougat out of her hand bag and
took refuge before a big Dutch picture of still life. Chewing
and staring at a crowd of hams, salmon, lobsters,
oysters and tankards of ale she thought for the thousandth
time: “That Hedvig! That miserable emaciated misfortune!
What a jolly life she might lead if she were not so
idiotic!”</p>

<p>Then Laura saw a dark shadow on the window. A
woman came stealing out from the edge of the wood.
She was thin and bent and she trudged heavily along in
the deep snow. In her skirt she carried a big bundle of
branches, brought down by the wind. From under the
cap pulled deep down over the eyes she looked with shy,
spying glances at the sledge and then walked quickly up
to the kitchen door.</p>

<p>A moment later she slid stealthily and nervously into
the hall.</p>

<p>That grey ghost was Hedvig Hill. The world had long
ago forgotten that she had been a beauty and had been
married to a young sympathetic patron of art. She generally
passed as a half-crazy old maid who was afraid of
people, who hated Jews, and hid her money in the seats
of chairs. But nobody knew how wealthy she was. Whilst
she herself got poorer and poorer and sank into a state of
hopeless sterility, her money had multiplied and multiplied.
It now represented an enormous sum of power and
influence that she could not grasp or imagine.</p>

<p>Hedvig stopped with her hand on the door knob and
stared anxiously at Laura:</p>

<p>“What do you want here?”</p>

<p>Laura swallowed a piece of chocolate:</p>

<p>“Peter has been ill for some time ... well, it is nothing
infectious....”</p>

<p>Hedvig sounded indifferent.</p>

<p>“Well, what about it?”</p>

<p>“He has taken home a creature from Majängen. He
imagines it is his son ... you remember that story....”</p>

<p>An expression of brooding hatred came over Hedvig:</p>

<p>“All men are disgusting brutes,” she mumbled.</p>

<p>Laura smiled teasingly:</p>

<p>“I don’t agree....”</p>

<p>She really writhed with the desire to say something sarcastic,
but kept quiet for diplomatic reasons.</p>

<p>Hedvig fidgeted impatiently. She suffered to see Laura’s
fatness, her furs, her smile:</p>

<p>“But what can I do? Why do you come here?”</p>

<p>“Well, Stellan asked me to fetch you. We must all three
go out to Peter. Fancy if he is mad enough to recognize
that unfortunate boy as his son!”</p>

<p>On Hedvig’s face came an expression of alarmed excitement,
of mean spite:</p>

<p>“Would Peter let us suffer for his excesses....”</p>

<p>“Yes, he has been angry with us ever since we took
Tord’s shares from him. He has got some plan in his head.
But be quick now!”</p>

<p>Hedvig stood hesitating:</p>

<p>“Will you drive me back here after?” she mumbled.</p>

<p>“Of course, you won’t have to spend a farthing. But
be quick!”</p>

<p>Hedvig disappeared and returned after a good while,
stuffed up in a lot of moth-eaten woollen underskirts,
jerseys and shawls, amongst which you could distinguish
an old ragged Spanish mantilla fastened about her ears
under the hat as if she had toothache.</p>

<p>They were late for Stellan. He had arranged to meet
them away out at the toll-house. He did not like to be
seen with his sisters, neither the fat one nor the thin one.
Frozen and angry he climbed up into the sledge and pulled
the fur rug round him without greeting them. These three,
sisters and brother, were not exactly a centre of warmth
in the icy cold winter twilight. And still their meeting was
really an extraordinary event, because they never met now
except at the annual board meetings.</p>

<p>Laura sat looking at Stellan, thinking that he had grown
ridiculously small. She often thought so of people
nowadays. As far as Stellan was concerned it was in
some measure true. Without being bent, he had as a matter
of fact shrunk, sunk into himself. Time had brought to
his face-mask stiff folds which would not permit a smile to
peep through. The hard restless eyes seemed to have
lost for ever the secret of joy. His whole person diffused
solemn boredom of long echoing passages and big empty
rooms of state.</p>

<p>The silence was only broken by the crunching of the
horses’ hoofs and the creaking of the runners where the
snow was thin. The snow had fallen during a gale so that
in open spaces the road was almost bare between the drifts.
They had already passed Ekbacken yard, and the three now
drove along the lake, the lake of their childhood. The
frosted bushes on the shore resembled enormous fantastic
crystals that had grown without sap and lived without life.
They leant over a world of ice-floes frozen together, cloven
from shore to shore by a black channel of open water.
Nothing gave such a shiver of cold as this reeking trembling
open water where the sluggish poisonous stream of Hell
seemed to flow up between the blocks of ice. Over on the
other shore there hung a gigantic cloud, like an enormous
bird, with the grey colour of primeval time, and laden
with pagan cold. Beneath it white globes of light trembled
against a smoky, dull-glowing sky, which seemed red from
the reflection of gigantic sacrificial fires. It was the big
new works built round the old glue factory. Day and
night it shone and roared and hissed on the other shore.
Day and night. There the timber of the forests was ground
to the finest powder as a substitute for cotton fibre in explosives.
A flourishing war industry!</p>

<p>Stellan did not notice that it was the roar of the flight
of Nidhögg, who feeds on corpses, that he heard, nor that
he passed along Nastrand, the shore of corpses, where
the dragon sucks the dead....</p>

<p>The stiff mask lit up for a moment as he lifted a gloved
finger in the direction of the arc lamps:</p>

<p>“Good shares,” he mumbled, “rose five today again.”</p>

<p>“I see,” said Laura, “then I will buy....”</p>

<p>“All right, but don’t keep them too long....”</p>

<p>The sledge was already turning up the avenue before
Stellan seemed to remember why they were driving out to
Selambshof.</p>

<p>“We must go slow with Peter,” he said. “If we make
a mess of the thing now we shall scarcely have time to repair
the damage. At any moment there might be serious
complications. Fortunately he does not seem to have written
any letters to that woman in Majängen. I mean the
mother. And neither has he taken any steps that point to
recognition or adoption. I know it both through the coachman
and the housekeeper, because I have long been forced
to maintain certain relations with them. This war crisis at
once sharpened Peter’s appetite for unpleasant kinds of
business in a way that made it necessary to keep an eye on
him. It is not long since he had half Selambshof full of
boxes of sugar and butter. Yes, the house was practically
used as a warehouse. I was there one evening myself and
saw the exquisite portrait of our old grandfather peeping
out from behind a pile of boxes of butter.... And then
his company. He has developed a habit of taking home
real criminals, and then they sit up half the night and drink
and gamble like madmen. That creature from Majängen
is by no means the first of his kind. Peter had scarcely
been ill a week when he sent the coachman for him. The
mother, who was a well-known termagant, swore and
behaved like a lunatic. She would have nothing to do with
‘that devil at Selambshof’ she said. And even the young
rogue himself seemed to have had remorse, for at first he
was unwilling to go. But when the coachman returned
with certain vague promises things went more easily and
he ran away from his dear mother to Selambshof.”</p>

<p>Laura had listened with great interest:</p>

<p>“I should have liked to see the first touching meeting,”
she said.</p>

<p>“It can’t have been very sentimental; Peter is said to
have stared rather angrily at the figure before him and to
have cried: ‘You are a lucky young rascal!’ And then
he asked: ‘Can you play camphio?’ No, he could not
play camphio but he must have been willing to learn, because
from that time the cards were out several evenings
one after the other. Now when Peter is too weak himself,
the coachman and that creature have to be in with him with
cards and alcohol....</p>

<p>“Yes, that is how things are at present. I don’t for a
moment suppose that Peter’s conscience has in any way
awakened or that he has grown fond of the scamp. No,
he is the slave of his money and nothing else. And now
he is working out a trick to keep his fortune together and
to cheat his legal heirs.”</p>

<p>The sledge stopped, they had arrived.</p>

<p>Selambshof looked higher and gloomier than ever—with
all its black windows. In the trees the crows were
quarrelling over their perch for the night. Nobody kept
them in check any longer, so they collected there every
evening. Both horses and people started at the screams
of hundreds of black ghostlike birds in the deep twilight.</p>

<p>An uncanny presentiment of death came over brother
and sisters. Selambshof was at one with Peter the Boss.
But Selambshof was also their own youth ... the root of
their lives ... and now Peter was going to die and lots
of other things with him....</p>

<p>Laura was frightened and wanted to get out of the sledge:</p>

<p>“No, this is too awful! I am going home again!”</p>

<p>Stellan had to pull her with him. They walked in
silently.</p>

<p>Peter had had his bed moved into the office. It stood
in the place of the old leather settee underneath the yellow,
fly-marked Selambshof map. A lonely oil lamp feebly lit
up some soiled glasses on the night table and his own swollen,
puffy, pale face. It really was a room in which an
Eskimo might have complained of the lack of comfort.
But Peter seemed to think it ought to be like that. He
had cheated many in the course of his life, had Peter the
Boss, amongst others himself.</p>

<p>The visit of his sisters and brother did not seem to be
unexpected or unwelcome. You could even see a little
flash of satisfaction in his features, which seemed to worry
Stellan. Hedvig was earnestly requested to keep quiet at
first, and even did so, after she had crept away into a
corner, wrapped up in all her jerseys and shawls. Otherwise
their tones were of the gentlest. They were all kind
care and spoke eagerly of doctors, nurses, cures, during
which Laura all the same kept at a certain cautious distance,
nervously chewing....</p>

<p>Then a dog was heard to bark outside, a great dull subterranean
sound as if it had come from beyond the copper
gates of death. All felt a shiver pass through them. Even
Peter seemed to feel rather uncomfortable:</p>

<p>“That damned dog!” he swore. “It sounds as if the
devil himself was on the way.”</p>

<p>Stellan ran to the window. Out in the snow he saw a
shadowy figure dancing a sort of war dance, whilst throwing
snowballs and lumps of ice at the furious watch-dog.
Thin, lank, with high shoulders, and bare hands and head,
in spite of the cold, the shadowy figure danced between
the drifts.</p>

<p>Stellan turned to Peter:</p>

<p>“It must be your ... your new boarder ... he amuses
himself by teasing the dog....”</p>

<p>“I see, is it only little Bernhard?” Peter grunted relieved.
“Yes, he is not exactly a friend of watch-dogs....”</p>

<p>But now Hedvig’s voice sounded suddenly from the
corner. She sat there looking as old-fashioned and motheaten
as if she had hung herself away in a wardrobe out
of pure meanness and then forgotten where the key was.
Her voice also sounded strangely stuffy and dusty:</p>

<p>“You should never have taken up with that woman,
Peter,” she mumbled. “You should never have taken up
with that woman....”</p>

<p>Peter did not seem to have noticed her before. A shiver
passed over his swollen features. Hedvig, that ghost from
the time of the great fear, again raised a secret anxiety in
his innermost being, right in the centre of the hard annual
rings of his soul.</p>

<p>“Aha, is it you, you crotchety old soul?” he muttered.
“You are the right person to cheer up an invalid, you are.”</p>

<p>After a murderous look at Hedvig, Laura hurried up
to Peter. Rustling with silk she came, covered with jewels,
the scalps of many men embedded on her swelling bosom.
Her voice sounded anxious:</p>

<p>“Dear little Peter, don’t make any scandal, it would be
an awful scandal!”</p>

<p>Then Stellan came up:</p>

<p>“You must think of our name. Don’t believe the story
is forgotten. You are confessing that you swore false.
A Selamb a perjurer! You can hear for yourself that
it is impossible. That creature would be a walking witness
to your perjury. It is not possible that you should make
such a scandal!”</p>

<p>Peter half rose on his elbow. His pale, puffy face
derived new life from his malice. He looked at them with
an angry gallows-bird expression reminiscent of the great
family quarrels:</p>

<p>“Scandal,” he panted, “scandal! That will be for you;
scandal! I shan’t suffer from it.”</p>

<p>That was also an advantage in its way! Peter sank back
on his pillow with an expression that almost resembled
peace.</p>

<p>The dull barking began again. Once more Stellan saw
the dark shadows tumble out into the twilight of the snow-lit
garden. Now he was swinging a bottle in his hand.
Carefully he staggered closer to the tied-up dog. Then
he stood balancing and watching with a cunning smile till
he could get in a blow on the head with the bottle. The
glass broke and the contents ran out over the eyes and
nose of the dog so that it crept into its kennel growling
and sniffing at the strong alcohol. Now the passage was
clear and the shadowy figure ventured to the window to
look in. The face, suddenly pressed flat against the ice-covered
window pane, looked grotesque.</p>

<p>Peter, who did not seem to be unconscious of these happenings,
beckoned to the watcher to come in. After some
scraping and moving about in the hall, somebody at last
groped about for the door handle. The door was slowly
and cautiously pushed open as if by a burglar and the
dog-fighter came in. He remained in a corner where the
light was faint, made a movement as if to take off a cap
that was not there, whilst his street-arab face, blue with
cold, quickly sobered and assumed an insinuating and
fawning expression.</p>

<p>You could not say that the heir presumptive was exactly
pleasant to look at. But Peter seemed as pleased as ever.
He introduced his son with a mien of having quite unexpectedly,
in the eleventh hour, produced out of his sleeve
a small dirty trump that would win the game:</p>

<p>“Yes, here you have the boy. A handsome lad, don’t
you think so? You, Stellan, have none. And yours ran
away, dear Laura. But mine stands here as big as life.
And Bernhard is his name.”</p>

<p>Bernhard grinned, a grin, however, that faded quickly
away when Peter quite unexpectedly began to shower abuse
on him because he had touched the whiskey without permission.</p>

<p>There followed a moment’s icy silence. Stellan went
slowly up to Bernhard:</p>

<p>“We have come here for your sake,” he said. “My poor
brother, whose strength is much reduced by his illness,
seems to have got it into his head for some unaccountable
reason that you are a relation of his. It is of course an
absurd mistake. As I don’t like mystery, I tell you so
openly in his presence.”</p>

<p>Bernhard fidgeted but did not dare to answer. He only
stared at Peter, who, with eyes half-closed, seemed to be
waiting:</p>

<p>Stellan looked like the incarnation of impersonal authority,
hard as iron and firm as a rock.</p>

<p>“Surely you can understand that we can find doctors
and lawyers to clear up this matter,” he said.</p>

<p>Peter was still silent, but he began to look as he had
done in days gone by when he used to do a stroke of business.
He winked with his right eye at Bernhard, whose
face suddenly lit up:</p>

<p>“No, thank you, sir—that won’t work. That was too
simple.”</p>

<p>Peter opened both eyes.</p>

<p>“You ought to say ‘Uncle,’ Bernhard,” he said, “you
ought to say ‘Uncle.’”</p>

<p>Laura could not suppress a little anxious snigger. But
Stellan did not move a feature. He came close up to
Bernhard:</p>

<p>“I advise you to be careful,” he said. “I have collected
some information about you in Majängen and know exactly
how you stand with the police.”</p>

<p>Bernhard bit his nails, frightened and furious. He
looked again at Peter, who now blinked with both his eyes,
and lay down comfortably as if to listen to music. And
Bernhard did not disappoint his expectations, but stared
Stellan boldly in the face:</p>

<p>“No, Uncle dear, don’t come in here with the police for
here you see one of the family....”</p>

<p>Stellan turned grey, but still controlled himself:</p>

<p>“I couldn’t think of bandying words with you. But if
you behave decently we might perhaps compensate you
for the vain hopes my brother may have raised. What
would you say to a couple of thousand-crown notes and a
ticket to America?”</p>

<p>Peter smiled:</p>

<p>“You want him to go to America, do you? So that he
might join Laura’s Georg, is that it? Well, Bernhard,
what do you say to America and the cash? A fine offer,
eh?”</p>

<p>“No, thanks, America does not suit me at all.”</p>

<p>Peter wagged his head, filled with paternal pride:</p>

<p>“The lad is no fool. I needn’t be ashamed of him. I
am damned if I don’t envy you when I think of all the
money you will get.”</p>

<p>Now Hedvig’s voice was suddenly heard again from the
corner:</p>

<p>“You should never have taken up with that woman, Peter.
You should never have taken up with that woman.”</p>

<p>Stellan grew furious. His thin bony hands trembled
and his voice broke. The brutality of the barrack-room
broke through his outer shell. It was terrible to see the
aristocratic mask fall so suddenly:</p>

<p>“Shut up, you old goat!” he shouted to Hedvig. Then
he held his clenched fist before Bernhard’s face:</p>

<p>“And you, you damned young scoundrel, be off in less
than no time, or the police will fetch you! Get out now!”</p>

<p>But Bernhard did not get out at all. With this tone
he was familiar. It frightened him less than the icy authority
before. He jumped closer to the bed and lowered his
head between his shoulders ready for a grip at the throat
or a blow at the back of the head. He was evidently prepared
for war as one understood it amongst the youth of
Majängen.</p>

<p>Peter rose. Yes, he rose up in bed. His pale puffy
face was covered by a broad grin:</p>

<p>“Bravo,” he grunted. “This is better than I thought
it would be. I am damned if I am not beginning to feel
quite well again.”</p>

<p>He was not unlike the man from Chicago who
fainted when he came into the pure air but revived
again when somebody held a rotten herring under his
nose.</p>

<p>It seemed, as a matter of fact, as if death had for a
moment withdrawn from the room before this last grotesque
phase of egoism. Poor overworked death in the
third year of the world war! Coarsened and banalised
by the crude slaughter of engines of destruction and by the
horribly laconic press announcements. Talk no more of
the twinkling evening star and the purifying effect of suffering
or of clear vision at the moment of farewell. What
an age! when men have grown so empty and hard that
they even know no fear. It is as if they no longer existed
themselves, but only their machines and their money.
Egoism driven to extremes turns into something almost
like its opposite. It dies the death of cold, around a
soulless mass of cold metal. Life—spontaneous happy and
suffering life—is nothing, its end cannot therefore be anything
either....</p>

<p>Peter was lying with ruined kidneys and was on the
point of collapse. But anything so fine as death, the good
old death, he had never met, and was never to meet.</p>

<p>He just fell to pieces.</p>

<p>A first milder paroxysm had come already. Laura suddenly
seized Stellan’s arm and pointed to the bed. Panic
made her mass of flesh tremble. It was an ugly, cowardly
fright:</p>

<p>“Come, let us go!” she panted and pulled her skirts
round her as if she had seen a mouse. “I want to get
away from this at once!”</p>

<p>Peter had sunk back on the pillow. He moaned heavily
and spasms passed over his shapeless face, whilst one
hand groped about on his chest and the other contracted
like a claw.</p>

<p>But Stellan pulled himself together with a furious effort.
His face grew cold and hard. This was the last chance.
Now the last card was being played. He pushed Laura
away and bent quickly over Peter with a low but penetrating
whisper:</p>

<p>“You are not going to steal from us and make a scandal,
Peter. The slightest effort will be the end. Let us separate
as friends!”</p>

<p>Peter struggled with his growing weakness. He forced
the words out with a tremendous effort:</p>

<p>“The will ... clear ... all clear....”</p>

<p>Stellan bent still lower. It sounded as if he had wanted
to push each word like a probe into the invalid’s conscience:</p>

<p>“We shall oppose the will ... there will be a lawsuit
... do you hear, a lawsuit.”</p>

<p>“I shall ... win ... win....”</p>

<p>“You will be declared of unsound mind. The will will
be declared null.”</p>

<p>“No ... I shall win ... win....”</p>

<p>And it sounded as if a secret malicious satisfaction
irresistibly overcame his cramp and pain. Peter the Boss
will bring an action, Peter the Boss will win. What the
deuce does it matter then if he happens to be dead.</p>

<p>Laura had already fled. Stellan followed slowly, after
having telephoned for the doctor. Hedvig came last. In
the door she turned, stared at her dying brother and mumbled
again obstinately, like a monomaniac:</p>

<p>“You should never have taken up with that woman,
Peter. You should never have taken up with that woman....”</p>

<p>But Bernhard had sunk down on a chair by the bed,
pale, sick, red-eyed. In his bold restless eyes there
appeared something like tears. Youth, even neglected and
criminal youth, has always a softer fibre. The real blindness,
cruelty, and sterility lies on the other side of the
midday line.</p>

<p>A few days later Peter the Boss went to sleep, having
never wakened again while he lived. His egoism survived
him. Blind and unredeemed it still survived in his
stupid cunning will. “My money shall rule them,” he
had thought. “They shan’t pass over Peter the Boss so
easily.” And neither did they.</p>

<p>The will showed that he had not taken any steps legally
to recognise his son. He simply made him his sole heir—but
with the important and particularly sound reservation
that he should not dissipate the fortune but only draw
the interest. To this will were attached, however, a lot
of strange conditions which really seemed to have been
added only to give the disappointed heirs a tempting opportunity.
Thus the heir, if he wanted to retain the inheritance,
must always remain clean shaven like the testator
when alive; never travel in motor cars; never back any
bills or go abroad. Strange also was the way he had remembered
his dear sisters and brother. To Stellan was
bequeathed Peter’s watch, an old silver turnip which the
lord of Trefvinge would not even touch with his fingers.
Hedvig got the humble stock of old clothes of the deceased,
and Laura was consoled with the yacht “Laura,” laid up in
the yard at Ekbacken with all its inventory, as for instance,
anchor, buoy, ensign staff, and glass rack, all in memory
of her beloved first husband, Herman Hermansson.</p>

<p>This will was the tombstone of Peter the Boss, and his
relations celebrated its unveiling by a long and scandalous
lawsuit in which nothing of the Selamb nature was hidden
from the eyes of the world. Against Levy, whom Peter
had had the good idea of appointing executor of the
will and who now got a welcome opportunity for revenge
both on Laura and Hedvig, a whole army of lawyers
and psychologists was mobilised. The Selamb brother
and sisters were now no longer afraid of scandal. These
people, who were really choking with money, tore every
shred of cover from the deceased and scratched the brain
out of his skull, in order to fling it on the judge’s table.
The whole press of the country echoed these magnificent
disclosures. From the court of first instance to that of
final instance this comedy of greed dragged its way along,
but Peter was too cunning for his opponents and won his
lawsuit in the end, as he had said. Yes, one may really
say that it was Peter who won and not his son. That
young rogue had, as might have been expected, not been
able to support his good fortune, but by the time of the
final settlement of the case, already lay in hospital, having
drunk himself to death.</p>

<p>Already during his lifetime Peter had been moderately
well known, but now under the plain stone out in the New
Cemetery, he grew to a type of power. He was accepted
and quoted. People told anecdotes about him, laughed at
those he had tricked, and shrugged their shoulders at his
enemies. The masses in the end always capitulate to a
scoundrel of coarser calibre than themselves. And when
nowadays a poor honest bourgeois who has been working
hard the whole week, takes his Sunday walk beyond the
toll bar and catches sight of Selambshof, he forgets all
that was done up there in that robbers’ stronghold in order
to hamper his own life and make it more difficult and
expensive. And he points at the false Gothic over the edge
of the forest and exclaims:</p>

<p>“Look! That’s where that scoundrel Peter Selamb lived!
Do you know what he used to say? ‘God will surely feed
the hawk,’ he used to say. And that is true enough—for
he cheated the town of a good round sum. Twelve
millions he left behind him, that scoundrel, Peter Selamb!”</p>

<p>There is secret admiration in his voice. The heart swells
so strangely in the poor little bourgeois heart, just as does
the heart of a soldier when you tell him about Napoleon.</p>

<p>Here ends this book, which has told of such as prefer
to hunt alone.</p>

<p>Georg Hermansson is at the moment of writing already
a prominent engineer in Philadelphia. As far as we can
see, he will soon have to return home to take over the
greater part of the spoil. Who knows? perhaps he will
one day fight the battle of civilisation with the ill-gotten
wealth of the Selambs against those who hunt in flocks.
The best days of the Selambs’ system are now over and
the egoism of the masses is perhaps now the greater danger.</p>
